The 2009 Act provides for free and compulsory elementary education to all children in the age group of 6-14 years. Section 3(2) of the Act provides that no child shall be required to pay any kind of fee or charge or expenses which may prevent him/her from pursuing and completing elementary education. Section 18 of the Act provides that no school other than the excepted category shall be established or can function without obtaining certificate of recognition from the appropriate government or local authority. Section 1 Thus, as stated, Section 12 (1) (c) of the RTE Act, 2009 does not violate Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution of India as it is a reasonable restriction imposed by the State in the interest of the general public under Article 19 (6) of the Constitution of India. (Para 10) RTE Act 2009 - Section 12 (1)(c) of the Right of Children to Free and The Supreme Court has held that the 2009 Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) does not apply to unaided minority schools.The bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the 2009 RTE Act does not apply to unaided minority institutions. "The 2009 Act is not applicable to unaided minority schools. The 200 The Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Bill, 2002 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on December 18, 2002. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on March 6, 2003 and by the Rajya Sabha on March 10, 2003. The Bill received the assent of the President on March 12, 2003 and was published in the Gazette of India on March The Supreme Court has observed that the right to education guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution is a fundamental right and not a fundamental duty.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "The right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21-A of the Constitution of India. It is not a fundamental duty. The right to education is a fundamental right of every child of the age of The Supreme Court has held that the Right to Education Act, 2009, which provides for free and compulsory education to all children in the age group of 6-14 years, is not applicable to private unaided educational institutions.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed that the Act does not apply to private unaided educational institutions. "The RTE Act is not applicable to private unaided... The RTE Act does not apply to unaided private educational institutions The Supreme Court observed that the right to education guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution of India is a fundamental right and not a socio-economic right.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21A and not a socio economic right guaranteed under Article 39(e) of the Constitution of India. "The right to education guaranteed under Art. 21 The Court also noted that the Parliament has faced many obstacles in fulfilling the socio-economic rights guaranteed under Part IV of the Constitution and that Parliament has on several occasions imposed restrictions on the enjoyment of the fundamental rights guaranteed to other citizens under Part III of the Constitution through constitutional amendments. The Court also noted that Article 31A, 31B and 31C were inserted in the Constitution to remove the obstacles for the realisation of socio-economic rights. The Court also noted that Article The Supreme Court has observed that the constitutional amendments carried out to Articles 31A, 31B, 31C, 15, 16, 19 and 21A were done to remove the obstacles in the way of achieving socio-economic justice.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 12(1 (Para 131) Constitution of India, 1950 ; Article 21A - The expression "State shall provide" in Article 21A is clear and unambiguous and the constitutional obligation or responsibility is on the State and not on private unaided educational institutions - The expression "for" has not been used in Article 21A and if the preposition "for" had been used, then the duty of the State would have been only to provide education to those who required it but to provide Section 12(1) (c) of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) mandates private unaided schools to reserve 25% of their seats for children belonging to disadvantaged groups and economically weaker sections (EWS) and to provide free and compulsory quality education to them. The Court held that Section 12 (1) (c) of the RTE Act is unconstitutional and violative of Articles Section 12 (1) (c) of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) mandates private unaided schools to reserve 25% of their seats for children belonging to weaker sections and disadvantaged groups in the neighbourhood. The Supreme Court has upheld the constitutional validity of Section 12 (1)(c) of the RTE Act, 2009, which mandates 25% reservation in private una "The object and purpose of the Act is to provide free and compulsory elementary education to all children of the age of 6-14 years and to achieve the goal of Universal Elementary Education for strengthening the social fabric of our society. The object and purpose of the Act is also to see that no child is held back in any class so that he/she would complete the elementary education. The object and purpose of providing free and compulsory education is also to see that the children of the weaker sections and disadvantaged In exercise of powers conferred under Section 38 of the Act, the Central Government, appropriate Governments and/or such other competent authorities shall frame directions, guidelines and rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act and in particular the matters stated under sub-section (2) of section 38 of the Act as expeditiously as possible, and in any case, not later than 6 months from the date of the pronouncement of this judgment. All State Governments which have not yet constituted the State Advisory