B.P. Jeevan Reddy and S. Mohan, JJ. We are in agreement with the judgment of Brother
B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. except to the extent indicated below.
2. The question which arose in the case of Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka:
MANU/SC/0357/1992 : [1992]3SCR658 , as also in the present cases before us, is
whether a citizen has a Fundamental Right to education for a medical, engineering or
other professional degree. The question whether the right to primary education, as
mentioned in Article 45 of the Constitution of India, is a Fundamental Right under
Article 21 did not arise in Mohini Jain's case and no finding or observation on that
question was called for. It was contended before us that since a positive finding on that
question was recorded in Mohini Join's case it becomes necessary to consider its
correctness on merits. We do not think so.
3. Learned arguments were addressed in support of and against the aforesaid view
which have been noticed in the judgments of our learned Brothers. It was contended by
learned Counsel appearing for some of the parties before us that Article 37 in Part IV of
the Constitution expressly states that the provisions contained in Part IV shall not be
enforceable by any court and that, therefore, assuming the right under Articles 45 to be
included within the ambit of Article 21, it would still not be enforceable. Emphasis was
also laid upon the language used in Article 45 which requires the State to "endeavor to
provide" for the free and compulsory education of children. A comparison of the
language of Article 45 with that of Article 49 was made and it was suggested that
whereas in Article 49 an "obligation" was placed upon the State, what was required by
Article 45 was "endeavor" by the State. We are of the view that these arguments as also
the arguments of counsel on the other side and the observations in the decisions relied
upon by them would need a thorough consideration, if necessary by a larger Bench, in a
case where the question squarely arises.
4. Having given our anxious consideration to the arguments in favour of and against the
question aforementioned, we are of the view that we should follow the well established
principle of not proceeding to decide any question which is not necessary to be decided
in the case. We, therefore, do not express any opinion upon this question except to hold
that the finding given in Mohini Jain's case on this question was not necessary in that
case and is, therefore, not binding Jaw. We are of the view that if it becomes necessary
to decide this question in any subsequent case then, for the reasons set out above and
having regard to its vast impact, inter alia on the country's financial capacity, the
question may be referred to a larger Bench for decision.
5. For the purposes of these cases, it is enough to state that there is no Fundamental
Right to education for a professional degree that flows from Article 21.
S. Mohan , J. 6.
I have had the advantage of perusing the judgment of my learned brother Justice J.P.
Jeevan Reddy. Though, I am in agreement with his conclusion, I would like to give my
own reasonings. Since my learned brother has set out the facts, I will confine myself to
answering the three questions, namely: 1. Whether the Constitution of India guarantees a fundamental right to
education to its citizens?
2. Whether there is a fundamental right to establish an educational institution
under Article 19(1)(g)?
3. Does recognition or affiliation make the educational institution an
instrumentality?
7. All these matters raise a burning issue; as to how to put an end to the evil of
capitation fee or at least to regulate it.
8. As a prelude, the importance of education may be set out.
9. The immortal Poet Valluvar whose Tirukkural will surpass all ages and transcend all
religions said of education:
Learning is excellence of wealth that none destroy; To man nought else affords
reality of joy.
10. Therefore, the importance of education does not require any emphasis.
11. The fundamental purpose of Education is the same at all times and in all places. It
is to transfigure the human personality into a pattern of perfection through a synthetic
process of the development of the body, the enrichment of the mind, the sublimation of
the emotions and the illumination of the spirit. Education is a preparation for a living
and for life, here and hereafter.
12. An old Sanskrit adage states: "That is Education which leads to liberation"-
liberation from ignorance which shrouds the mind; liberation from superstition which
paralyses effort, liberation am prejudices which blind the Vision of the Truth.
13. In the context of a democratic form of government which depends for its
sustenance upon the enlightenment of the populace, education is at once a social and
political necessity. Even several decades ago, our leaders harped upon universal
primary education as a desideratum for national progress. It is rather sad that in this
great land of ours where knowledge first lit its torch and where the human mind soared
to the highest pinnacle of wisdom, the percentage of illiteracy should be appalling.
Today, the frontiers of knowledge are enlarging with incredible swiftness. he foremost
need to be satisfied by our education is, therefore, the eradication of illiteracy which
persists in a depressing measure. Any effort taken in this direction cannot be deemed to
be too much.
14. Victories are gained, peace is preserved, progress is achieved, civilization is built
up and history is made not on the battle-fields where ghastly murders are committed in
the name of patriotism, not in the Council Chambers where insipid speeches are spun
out in the name of debate, not even in factories where are manufactured novel
instruments to strangle life, but in educational institutions which are the seed-beds of
culture, where children in whose hands quiver the destinies the future, are trained.
From their ranks will come out when they grow up, statesmen and soldiers, patriots and
philosophers, who will determine the progress of the land.
15. The importance of education has come to be recognised in various judicial
decisions.
16. In Oliver Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (U.S. Supreme Court Reports 98 Law. Ed. U.S. 347
it was observed:
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local
governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures
for education both demonstrate our recognition of the importance of education
to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic
public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is very foundation of
good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to
cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping
him to adjust normally to his environment.
17. Various fundamental rights enumerated under part III of our Constitution can be
divided into two classes.
1. Injunction restraining the State from denying certain fundamental rights like
Articles 14 and 21.
2. A positive conferment of such fundamental rights under Articles 19, 25 and
26 etc.
18. In this connection, the following passage from Addl. Dist. Magistrate v. S.S. Shukla
MANU/SC/0062/1976 : 1976 Supp. SCR 172 may be quoted:
Part III of our Constitution confers fundamental rights in positive as well as in negative langulage. Article 15(1), 16(1), 19, 22(2), 22(5), 25(1), 26, 29(1), 30 and 32(1) can be described to be Articles in positive language. Articles 14, 15(2), 16(2), 20, 21,, 22(1), 22(4), 27, 28(1), 29(2), 31(1) and (2) are in negative language. It is apparent that most categories of fundamental rights are
in positive as well as in negative language. A fundamental right couched in
negative language accentuates by reason thereof the importance of that right.
The negative language is worded to emphasise the immunity from State action
as a fundamental right. (See The State of Bihar v. maharajadhiraja Sir
Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga and Ors.) These fundamental right conferred
by our Constitution have taken different forms. Some of these fundamental
right are said to have the texture of Basic Human Rights (See A.K. Gopalan's
case (supra) at pp. 96-97, 248-293 and Bank Nationalisation case (supra) at pp. 568-71, 576-78). Articles 21 reads as follows:
Perfection of life and personal liberty:No person shall be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
19. It would be clear that it acts as a shield against deprivation of life or personal
liberty.
20. A question may be asked as to why it did not positively confer a fundamental right
to life or personal liberty like Article 19. The reason is, great concepts like liberty and
life were purposefully left to gather meaning from experience. They relate to the whole
domain of social and economic fact. The drafters of this Constitution knew too well that
only a stagnant society remains unchanged.
21. Unlike such rights as required to be enumerated it has long been recognised that
the individual shall have full protection in person. It is a principle as old as law.
However, it has been found necessary from time to time to define a new the exact
nature and the extent of such protection. Political, social and economic changes
essential the recognition of new rights and the law in its eternal youth grows to meet
the demands of society. The right to life and liberty inhere in every man. There is no
need to provide for the same in a positive manner.
22. While dealing with the scope of Article 21 it was observed in Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India AIR 1978 579 that:
It is obvious that Article 21, though couched in negative language, confers the
fundamental right to life and personal liberty.
So far as the right personal liberty
is concerned, it is ensured by providing that no one shall be deprived of
personal liberty except according to procedure Prescribed by law. The first
question that arises for consideration on the language of Article 21 is: what is
the meaning and content of the words 'personal liberty' as used in this Article?
This question incidentally came up for discussion in some of the judgments in A.K. Gopalan v. 'State of Madras, MANU/SC/0012/1950 : 1950CriLJ1383 and the observations made by Patanjali Sastri, J., Mukherjee, J. and S.R. Das, J.
seemed to place a narrow interpretation on the words 'personal liberty' so as to
confine the protection of Article 21 to freedom of the person against unlawful
detention. But there was no definite pronouncement made on this point since
the question before the Court was no so much the interpretation of the words
'person liberty' as the inter-relation between Articles 19 and 21. It was in
Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0085/1962 : 1963CriLJ329 that the
question as to the proper scope and meaning of the expression personal liberty'
came up pointedly for consideration for the first time before this Court. The
majority of the Judges took the view "that 'personal liberty' is used in the
article as a compendious term to include within itself all the varieties of rights
which go to makeup the 'personal liberties' of man other than those dealt with
in the several clauses of Article 19(1). In other words, while Article 19(1) deals
with particular species of attributes of that freedom, personal liberty' in Article
21 takes in and comprises the residue". The minority Judges, however,
disagreed with this view taken by the majority and explained their position in
the following words:
No doubt the expression 'personal liberty is a comprehensive one and
the right to move freely is an attribute of personal liberty. It is said that
the freedom to move freely is carved out of personal liberty and,
therefore, the expression "personal liberty' in Article 21 excludes that
attribute. In our view, this is not a correct approach. Both are
independent fundamental rights, though there is overlapping. There is
no question of one being carved out of another. The fundamental right
of life and personal liberty has many attributes and some of them are
found in Article 19. If a person's fundamental right under Article 21 is
infringed, the State can rely upon a law to sustain the action, but that
cannot be a complete answer unless the said law satisfies the test laid
down in Article 19(2) so far as the attributes covered by Article 19(2)
so far as the attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned.
There can be no doubt that in view of the decision of this Court in R.C. Cooper
v. Union of India MANU/SC/0011/1970 : [1970]3SCR530 the minority view
must be regarded as correct and the majority view must be held to have been
overruled.
(Emphasis supplied)
Therefore, it is not correct to state that because the article is couched in a negative
language, positive rights to life and liberty are not conferred as argued by Mr.
Tarkunda, learned Counsel.
23. This Court in Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0085/1962 : 1963CriLJ329
(345, 347 and 349) interpreted the word "liberty" on the lines of the meaning accorded
to liberty in the 5th and 14th amendments to the U.S. Constitution by in Munn v. Illinois (1877) 94 U.S. 113 . Accordingly it Vas held:
Personal Liberty' in Article 21 takes in all the rights of man.
24. The 4th Amendment of U.S. Constitution guaranteed "the right to be secure on their
sons, houses...."
25. This right was read into Article 21 and it was held that "there cannot be an
unauthorised intrusion into a person's home".
26. In Kesavananda Bharati v. Kerala MANU/SC/0114/1972 : 1972CriLJ1526 Mathew, J.
stated therein that the fundamental right themselves have no fixed content, most of
them are empty vessels into which each generation must pour its content in the light of
its experience. It is relevant in this context to remember that in building up a just social
order it is sometimes imperative that the fundamental rights should be subordinated to
directive principles.
27. In Puthumma's case, MANU/SC/0315/1978 : [1978]2SCR537 , it has been stated:
The attempt of the court should be to expand the reach and ambit of the
fundamental rights rather than accentuate their meaning and content by process
of judicial construction.... Personal liberty in Article 21 is of the widest
amplitude.
28. In this connection, it is worthwhile to recall what was said of the American
Constitution in Mussorie v. Holland 252 U.S. 416 :
When we are dealing with words that also are constituent act, like the
Constitution of the United States, we must realize that they have called into life
a being the development of which could not have been foreseen completely by
the most gifted of its begetters.
29. In State of M.P. v. Pramod Bhyaratiya and Ors. 1922 (2) Scale 791 it is stated:
Because Clause (d) of Article 39 spoke of "equal pay for equal work" for both
men and women it did not cease to be part of article 14. To say that the rule
having been stated as a directive principle of State Policy, and not enforceable
in court of law is to indulge in sophistry. Parts IV & III of Constitution are not
supposed to be exclusionary of each other. They are complementary to each
other. The rule is as much a part of Article 14 as it is of Clause (1) of Article 16.
30. This Court has held that several unremunerated rights fall within Article 21 since
personal liberty is of widest amplitude.
31. The following rights are held to be covered under Article 21: 1. The right to go abroad Satwant Singh v. A.P.O. New Delhi MANU/SC/0040/1967 : [1967]3SCR525 2.
The right to privacy Govinda v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0119/1975 : 1975CriLJ1111 In this case reliance was placed on the American decision in Griswols v.
Connecticut 381 US 479 .
3. The right against solitary confinement
Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration MANU/SC/0184/1978 : 1978CriLJ1741 .
4. The Right against Bar fetters.
Charles Sobraj v. Supt. Central Jail MANU/SC/0377/1978 : [1979]1SCR111 5. The Right to legal aid
Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra
MANU/SC/0119/1978 : 1978CriLJ1678 6. The Right to speedy trial
Hussaini Katoon v. State of Bihar
MANU/SC/0119/1979 : 1979CriLJ1036 7. The Right against Handcuffing
Prem Shankar v. Delhi Administration
MANU/SC/0084/1980 : 1980CriLJ930 8. The Right against delayed execution
T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of Tamil Nadu
MANU/SC/0172/1983 : 1983CriLJ693 9. The Right against Custodial violence
MANU/SC/0382/1983 : 1983CriLJ642
Sheela Bhasre v. State of Maharashtra 10. The Right against public hanging
A.G. of India v. Lachmadevi : 1986CriLJ364 11.
Doctor's Assistance
Pt. Parmanand Katara v. UOI
MANU/SC/0423/1989 : 1990CriLJ671 12. Shelter
Santistar Builder v. N.KI. Totame
MANU/SC/0115/1990 : AIR1990SC630 32. If really Article 21, which is the heart of fundamental rights has received expanded
from time to time there is no justification as to why it cannot be interpreted in the light
45 wherein the State is obligated to provide education upto 14 years of age, within the
time limit.
33. So much for personal liberty.
34. Now coming to life: this Court interpreted in Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of
India (3) SCC 161 :
It is the fundamental right of everyone in this country, assured under the
interpretation given Article 21 by this Court in Francis Mullin's case, to live with
human dignity, free from citation. This right to live with human dignity
enshrined in Article 21 derives its life breath the Directive Principles of State
Policy and particularly Clauses (e) and (f) of Article 39 Articles 41 and 42 and
at the least, therefore, it must include protection of the health and strength of
workers, men and women, and of the tender age of children against abuse,
unities and facilities for children to develop in a healthy manner and in
conditions of freedom and dignity, educational facilities, just and humane
conditions of work and maternity relief. These are the minimum requirements
which must exist in order to enable a person to (with human dignity and no
State - neither the Central Government nor any State eminent has the right to
take any action which will deprive a person of the enjoyment basic essentials.
Since the Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Clauses (e) and (f) of
Article 39, Articles 41 and 42 are not enforceable in a court of law, it may not
be possible to compel the State through the judicial process to make provision
by statutory enactment or executive fiat for ensuring these basic essentials
which go to make up a life of dignity but where legislation is already enacted
by the State providing these basic requirements to the workmen and thus
investing their right to live with basic human dignity, concrete reality and
content, the State can certainly be obligated to ensure observance of legislation
for inaction on the part of the State in securing implementation of such Nation
would amount to denial of the right to live with human dignity enshrined in
Article 21, more so in the context of Article 256 which provides that the
executive power of every State so exercised as to ensure compliance with the
laws made by Parliament and any 's which apply in that State.
35. This, was elaborated in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation
MANU/SC/0039/1985 : AIR1986SC180 :
As we have stated while summing up the petitioners' case, the main plank of
their argument is that the right to life which is guaranteed by Article 21
includes the right to livelihood and since, they will be deprived of their
livelihood if they are evicted from their slum and pavement dwellings, their
eviction is tantamount to deprivation of their life and is hence unconstitutional.
For purposes of argument, we will assume the factual correctness of the
premise that if the petitioners are evicted from their dwellings, they will be
deprived of their livelihood. Upon that assumption, the question which we have
to consider is whether the right to life includes the right to livelihood. We see
only one answer to that question, namely, that it does. The sweep of the right
to life conferred by Article 21 is wide and far reaching. It does not mean merely
that life cannot be extinguished or taken away as, for example, by the
imposition and execution of the death sentence, except according to procedure
established by law. That is but one aspect of the right to life. An equally
important facet of that right is the right to livelihood because, no person can
live without the means of living, that is, the means of livelihood. If the right to
livelihood is not treated as a part of the constitutional right life, the easiest way
of depriving a person of his right to life would be to deprive him of his means
of livelihood to the point of abrogation. Such deprivation would not only
denude the life of its effective content and meaningfulness but it would make
life impossible to live. And yet, such deprivation would not have to be in
accordance with the procedure established by law, if the right to livelihood is
not regarded as a part of the right to live. That, which alone makes it possible
to live, leave aside what makes life liveable, must be deemed to be an integral
component of the right to life. Deprive a person of his right to livelihood and
you shall have deprived him of his life. Indeed that explains the massive
migration of the rural population to big cities. They migrate because they have
no means of livelihood in the villages. The motive force which propels their
desertion of their hearts and homes in the village is the struggle for survival,
that is the struggle for life. So unimpeachable is the evidence of the nexus
between life and the means of livelihood. They have to eat to live: Only a
handful can afford the luxury of living to eat. That they can do, namely, eat,
only if they have the means of livelihood. That is the context in which it was
said by Douglas, J. in Baksey that the right to work is the most precious liberty
that man possesses. It is the most precious liberty because, it sustains and
enables a man to live and the right to life is a precious freedom. "Life", as
observed by Field, J. in Munn v. Illinois, means something more than mere
animal existence and the inhibition against the deprivation of life extends to all
those limits and faculties by which life is enjoyed. This observation was quoted
with approval by this Court in Kharak Singh v. State of U.P.
Article 39(a) of the Constitution, which is a Directive Principle of State Policy,
provides that the State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing
that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means
of livelihood. Article 41, which is another Directive Principle, provides, inter
alia, that the State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work in cases of
unemployment and of undeserved want. Article 37 provides that the Directive
Principles, though not enforceable by any court, are nevertheless fundamental
in the governance of the country. The principles contained in Articles 39(a) and
41 must be regarded as equally fundamental in the understanding and
interpretation of the meaning and content of fundamental rights.
If there is an
obligation upon the State to secure to the citizens an adequate means of
livelihood and the right to work, it would be sheer pedantry to exclude the right
to life. The State may not, by affirmative action, be compellable to pro vide
adequate means of livelihood or work to the citizens.
But, any person, who is
deprived of his right to livelihood except according to just and fair procedure
established by law, can challenge the deprivation as offending the right to life
conferred by Article 21.
(Emphasis supplied) 36. If, thus, personal liberty and life have come to be given expanded meaning, the
question to be addressed is whether life which means to live with dignity, would it be
incorrect to hold that stakes within it education as well? To put it more emphatically,
whether right to education flows from right to life? Before we go to Mohini Jain's case
MANU/SC/0357/1992 : [1992]3SCR658 it may be necessary to refer to State of Andhra
Pradesh vis. Lavu Narendranath MANU/SC/0050/1971 : [1971]3SCR699 it is stated:
Lastly it was urged that such test affected the personal liberty of the candidates
secured under Article 21 of the Constitution. We fail to see how refusal of an
application to enter a medical college can be said to affect one's article.
Everybody, subject to the eligibility prescribed by the University, was at liberty
to apply for admission to the medical college. The number of seats being
limited compared to the number of applicants every candidate could not expect
to be admitted. Once it is held that the test is not invalid the deprivation of
personal liberty, if any, in the matter of admission to a medical college was
according to procedure established by law. Our attention was drawn to the case
of Spottwood v. Sharpe, in which it was held that due process clause of the
Fifty Amendment of the American Constitution Prohibited racial segregation in
the District of Columbia. Incidentally the Court made a remark (at p. 887):
"Although the Court has not assumed to define "liberty" with any great
precision, that term is not confined to mere freedom from bodily restraint.
Liberty under law extends to the full range of conduct which the individual is
free to pursue, and it cannot be restricted except for a proper governmental
objective. Segregation in public education is not reasonably related to any
proper governmental objective, and thus it imposes on Negro children of the
District of Columbia a burden that constitutes an arbitrary deprivation of their
liberty in violation of the Due Process Clause.
"The problem before is altogether different. In this case everybody subject to
the minimum qualification prescribed was at liberty to apply for admission. The
Government objective in selecting a number of them was certainly not improper
in the circumstances of the case".
37. It requires to be carefully noted that deprivation of personal liberty if done by a
valid procedure established by law, the fundamental right under Article 21 was not, in
any manner, affected. That is the crux of this ruling.
38. Now, coming to Mohini Jain's case (supra) it was observed at pages 679-80:
Right to life" is the compendious expression for all those rights which the
courts must enforce because they are basic to the dignified enjoyment of life. It
extends to the full range of conduct which the individual is free to pursue. The
right to education flows directly from right to life. The right to life under Article
21 and the dignity of an individual cannot be assured unless it is accompanied
by the right to education. The State Government is under an obligation to make
endeavor to provide educational facilities at all levels to its citizens.
39. Education is enlightenment. It is the one that lends dignity to a man as was rightly
observed by Gajendragarkar, J. (as he then was) in University of Delhi v. Ram Nath
MANU/SC/0143/1963 : (1963)IILLJ335SC :
Education seeks to build up the personality of the pupil by assisting his
physical, intellectual, moral and emotional development.
40. If life is so, interpreted as to bring within it right to education, it has to be
interpreted in the light of directive principles. This Court has uniformly taken the view
that harmonious interpretation of the fundamental rights vis-a-vis the directive
principles must be adopted. We will now refer to some of the important cases.
41. In State of Kerala and Anr. v. N.M. Thomas and Anr. MANU/SC/0479/1975 :
(1976)ILLJ376SC it was held: "There is complete unanimity of judicial opinion of this
Court that the Directive Principles and the Fundamental Rights should be construed in
harmony with each other and every attempt should be made by the Court to resolve
apparent inconsistency."
The Directive Principles contained in Part IV constitute the stairs to climb the
High edifice of a socialistic State and the Fundamental Rights are the means
through which one can reach the top of the edifice.
The Directive Principles form the fundamental feature and the social conscience
of the Constitution which enjoins upon the State to implement these Directive
Principles. The Directives, thus provide the policy, the guidelines and the end of
socio-economic freedom and Acts. 14 and 16 are the means to implement the
policy to achieve the ends sought to be promoted by the Directive Principles. So
far as the Courts are concerned where there is no apparent inconsistency
between the Directive Principles contained in Part IV and the Fundamental
Rights mentioned in Part III, there is no difficulty in putting a harmonious
construction which advances the object of the constitution.
42. In Pathumma and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/0315/1978 :
[1978]2SCR537 it was observed:
In fact in the case of His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru v. State
of Kerala all the Judges constitution the Bench have with one voice given the
Directive Principles contained in the Constitution a place of honour. Hegde and
Mukherjea, JJ. as they then were have said that the fundamental rights and the
Directive Principles constitute the "conscience" of our Constitution. The purpose
of the Directive Principles is to fix certain socio and economic goals for
immediate attainment by bringing about a non-violent social revolution.
Chandrachud, J. observed that our Constitution aims at bringing about a
synthesis between Fundamental Rights' and the 'Directive Principles of State
Policy' by giving to the former a place of pride and to the latter a place of
permanence.
In a latter case State of Kerala and Anr. v. N.M. Thomas and Ors.
MANU/SC/0479/1975 : (1976)ILLJ376SC one of us (Fazal Ali, J.) after
analysing the Judgement delivered by all the judges in the Kesvananda Bharati's
case (supra) on the importance of the Directive Principles observed as follows:
In view of the principles adumbrated by this Court it is clear that the
Directive Principles form the fundamental feature and the social
conscience of the Constitution and the Constitution enjoins upon the
State to implement these directive principles. The directives thus
provide the policy, the guidelines and the end of socio-economic
freedom of Articles 14 and 16 are the means to implement the policy to
achieve the ends sought to be promoted by the directive principles. So
far as the courts are concerned where there is no apparent
inconsistency between the directive principles contained in Part III,
which in fact supplement each other, there is no difficulty in putting a
harmonious construction, which advances the object of the
Constitution. Once this basic fact is kept in mind, the interpretation of
Articles 14 and 16 and their scope and ambit become as clear as day".
In the case of The State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala this Court while
stressing the importance of directive principles contained in the Constitution
observed as follows:" "The avowed purpose of our Constitution is to create a
welfare State. The directive principles of State Policy set forth in Part IV of our
Constitution enjoins upon the State the duty to strive to promote the welfare of
the people by securing and protecting, as effectively as it may, a social order in
which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions "of
the national life.
In the case of Fatehchand Himmatlal and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra etc.
(supra) the Constitution Bench of this Court observed as follows:
Incorporation of Directive Principles of State Policy casting the high
duty upon the State to strive to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effectively as it may, asocial order in which
justice social, economic and political - shall inform all the institutions
of the national life, is not idle point but command to action. We can
never forget, except at our peril, that the Constitution obligates the
State to ensure an adequate means of livelihood to its citizens and to
see that the health and strength of workers, men and women are not
abused, that exploitation, moral and material, shall be extradited. In
short, State action defending the weaker sections from social injustice
and all forms of exploitation and raising the standard of living of the
people, necessarily imply that economic activities, attired as trade or
business or commerce, can be de-recognised as trade or business.
Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0156/1992 : (1992)IILLJ452SC it was observed: There is no doubt that broadly interpreted and as a necessary logical corollary,
right to life would include the right to livelihood and, therefore, right to work.
It is for this reason that this Court in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal
Corporation while considering the consequences of eviction of the pavement
dwellers had pointed out that in that case the eviction not merely resulted in
deprivation of shelter but also deprivation of livelihood in as much as the
pavement dwellers were employed in the vicinity of their dwellings. The Court
had, therefore, emphasised that the problem of eviction of the pavement
dwellers had to be viewed also in that context. This was, however, in the
context of Article 21 which seeks to protect persons against the deprivation of
their life except according to procedure established by law. This country has so
far not found it feasible to incorporate the right to livelihood as as fundamental
right in the constitution. This is because the country has so far not attained the
capacity to guarantee it, and no because it considers it any the less
fundamental to life. Advisedly, Article 41 of which enjoins upon the State to
make effective provision for securing the same "within the limits of its
economic capacity and development". Thus even while giving the direction to
the State to ensure the right to work, the Constitution makers thought it
prudent not to do so without qualifying it.
Such a conclusion may not be open to criticism so interpreted it advances social justice.
43. In Vol. VII at pages 909 and 910 of the Constituent Debates (1948-49) it is stated:
The Honourable Shri K. Santnanam: Sir, you will remember that throughout
Europe; after the first World War, all that the minorities wanted was the right to
have their own schools, and to conserve their own cultures which the Fascist
and the Nazis refused them. In fact, they did not want even the State Schools.
They did not want State aid, or State assistance. They simply wanted that they
should be allowed to pursue their own customs and to follow their own cultures
and to establish and conduct their own schools. Therefore I do not think it is
right on the part of any minority to depreciate the rights given in Article 23(1).
Sir, in Clause (2) of Article 23 they are protected against discrimination. It is
just possible that there may be many provinces based on language and
therefore the Government, the ministry and the legislature will be composed
dominantly by members of the majority language. This right of non-
discrimination will then become fundamental and valuable. And then in Clause
(3) of this article, it is provided that when the State gives aid to education, it
shall not discriminate against any educational institution, on the ground that it
is under the management of a minority, whether based on community or on
language, and this will be particularly applicable to the linguistic minorities. In
every province, there are islands of these? linguistic minorities. For instance, in
my own province of Tamil Nadu there are islands, in almost every district, of
villages where a large number of Telugu-speaking people reside. In this
connection we have to hold the balance even between two different trends. First
of all, we have to give to large linguistic minorities their right to be educated -
especially in the primary stages in their own language. At the same time we
should not interfere with the historical process of assimilation. We ought not to
think that for hundred and thousands of years to come these linguistic
minorities will perpetuate themselves as they are. The historical processes
should be allowed free. play. These minorities should be helped to become
assimilated with the people of the locality. They should gradually absorb the
language of the locality and become merged with the people there. Otherwise
they will be aliens as it were, in those provinces. Therefore, we should not have
rigid provisions by which every child is automatically protected in what may be
called his mother-tongue. On the other hand, this process should not be
sudden, it should not be forced. Wherever there are large numbers of children,
they should be given education-primary education-in their mother-tongue. At
the same time, they should be encouraged and assisted to go to the ordinary
schools of the provinces and to imbibe the local tongue and get assimilated
with the people. If feel this clause does provide for these contingencies in the
most practicable fashion. Sir, Mr. Lari wanted an amendment which seeks to
provide that every child, rather that every section of the citizens, shall be
entitled to have primary education imparted to its children through the medium
of the language of that section. I suppose what he means is that wherever
primary education is imparted at the expense of the State, such provisions
should be made. But this, I think, would give the minority or section of people
speaking a language the complete and absolute right to have primary education
which the people of this country do not have today. In the directives we have
provided that in fifteen years' time there should be universal primary education.
But no one knows whether the financial and other conditions in the country
would permit of universal primary education to be established even then. Today
no one in India can ask for primary education as a right as only ten per cent of
the population get primary education. Therefore, it is not possible to accept Mr.
Lari's amendment, because that would lead to all kinds of difficulties. If it were
passed, then anyone can go to the Supreme Court and say that his child must
get education in a particular language. That is not practicable, and I do not
think even his intention is at all that.
At the same time. I think, what he has pleaded for must be kept in mind as a
general policy. It should be direction of the Central and the Provincial
Governments to see that wherever there are congregations of boys and girls
having a distinct mother tongue, schools should be provided in that language. I
hope, that will be the policy adopted all over the country, especially as, if there
is going to be new linguistic revisions of the boundaries, all the border areas
will be full of this problem. I hope the report of the Linguistic Provinces
Commission will contain some wise provisions to be adopted in this behalf.
There should be no difficulty or hardship whatsoever in provinces when they
are rearranged on a linguistic basis. For instance, if a Telugu goes to one area
or the other, he should not have any hardship. As I said, this is a most difficult
and complicated problem and it cannot be dealt with in detail in the
fundamental rights. This Article 23 provides as much security as can be done in
the Constitution. Other securities will have to be provided for both by
Parliamentary and provincial legislation, and I hope it will be done in due
course.
44. It is true the framers of the Constitution took that view. But the position as on
today is very different. The reason is Article 45 states as under:
Provision for free and compulsory education for children. The State shall
endeavor to provide, within a period often years from the commencement of
this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until they
complete the age of fourteen years.
45. 14 years, spoken to under the Article, had long ago come to an end. We are in the
43rd year of Independence. Yet, if Article 45 were to remain a pious wish and a fond
hope, what good of it having regard to the importance of primary education? A time
limit was prescribed under this Article. Such a time limit is found only here. If,
therefore, endeavor has not been made till now) make this Article reverberate with life
and articulate with meaning, we should think the Court Should step in. The State can be
obligated to ensure a right to free education of every child upto age of 14 years. On this
aspect a useful reference could be made to what has been observed in Human Rights
and Education Vol. 3 edited by Norma Bernstein Tarrow at page 41:
The State is directed to strive for the right to education, make provision for free
and compulsory education (Article 45), and promote the educational interests of
Scheduled Castes and Tribes, and other weaker sections (including women).
Education is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments, but the
Union Government has certain responsibilities specified in the Constitution on
matters such as planning, higher education and promotion of education for
weaker sections. Most states have enacted legislation for compulsory education.
At the end of the sixth Five Year Plan (1985) primary education for ages 6-11 is
free in all states, and for age group 11-14 it is free in all except Orissa, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal. In these states, girls and members of Scheduled
Castes and Tribes get free education, and incentives such as mid-day meals,
free books and uniforms, are provided. At the secondary stage several states
have free education for all children and those which do not make free education
available to all, do so for girls, Scheduled Castes and Tribes. Thus, free
education in all states is provided at the primary and secondary stages for girls,
Scheduled Castes and Tribes.
Again at page 43 it is stated:
Useful measures of achievement in terms of the right to education are literacy
and enrolment levels. The contemporary picture, however, is not as good as
one would expect after 39 years of independence. The literacy rate has risen
from 16.6 percent in 1951 to 36.6 percent according to the 1981 census. But
regional variations indicate a range of above 60 percent literacy in Kerala to
below 20 percent in some states. Nearly 120 million in the functional age group
of 15-35 are still illiterate (Bhandari, 1981). Over the last three decades of
planned development, rapid growth in facilities has attempted to provide access
for minorities and girls. The number of educational institutions has more than
doubled, while the number of teachers and students has multiplied many times.
But despite the fact that 93 percent of the rural population have access to
schools, nearly 30 percent Of 6-14 year old (60 million) do not go to school
and 77 percent drop out. A large percentage of the dropouts are girls and
Schedule Caste and Tribe members. The main problems are socio-economic
constraints which result in educational constraints. Poverty is a major cause for
keeping children away from school.
46. Article 26(1) of the Universal declaration of Human Rights states:
Everyone has the right to education.
Technical and professional education shall
be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to
all on the basis of merit.
(Emphasis supplied) 47. In the World of Science and the rule of Law by John Ziman 1986 Edition at page 49
it is stated:
The principal global treaty which covers this right is the ICESCR, whose Article
13 recognizes the general right to education enunciated by the UDHR, but then
goes on to add the following more specific provisions:
(2) The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that, with a
view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available free to
all;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including
technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made
generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate
means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free
education;
(c) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to all, on
the progressive introduction of free education;
(d) Fundamental education shall be encouraged or intensified
as far as possible for those persons who have not received or
completed the whose period of their primary education;
(e) The development of a system of schools at all levels shall
be actively pursued, an adequate fellowship system shall be
established, and the material conditions of teaching staff shall
be continuously improved.
The status of this Article is a useful reminder of the problems inherent in any
attempt to create a 'social' right of this kind for individuals against their states.
48. No doubt, the above extract from Mohini Jain's case (supra) states "education at all
levels" but we consider the law has been somewhat broadly stated and, therefore, must
be confined to what is envisaged under Article 45.
49. The criticism by Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Counsel that Article 37 has not been
adverted to and the reliance on directive principles is untenable, in view of what we
have stated above.
50. Higher education calls heavily on national economic resources. The right to it must
necessarily be limited in any given country by its economic and social circumstances.
The State's obligation to provide it is, therefore, not absolute and immediate by relative
and progressive. It has to take steps to the maximum of its available resources with a
view to achieving progressively the full realization of the right of education by all
appropriate means. But, with regard to the general obligation to provide education, the
State could be said to have violated the same. If it the State could be said to have
violated the same. If it deliberately starred its educational system by resources that it
manifestly had available unless it could show that it was allocating them to some even
more pressing programme. Therefore, by holding education as a fundamental right upto
the age of 14 years this Court is not determining the priorities. On the contrary,
reminding it of the solemn endeavor has to take, under Article 45, within a prescribed
time, which time limit has expired long ago.
51. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Counsel contends that in the U.S. Supreme Court in
the case of San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodrigues (1973). U.S 411 . it
was observed: "It is not province of this Court to create substantive constitutional rights
in the name of guaranteeing equal protection of the laws. Thus the key to discovering -
whether education is "Fundamental" is not to be found (imcomparisons) of the relative
societal significances of education as opposed to subsistence or housing.... Rather, the
answer lies in assessing whether there is a right to education explicitly or implicitly
guaranteed by the Constitution".
52. But, if really the fundamental rights and the directive principles are complementary
to each other we are unable to see why this fundamental right cannot be interpreted in
this manner. The American Constitution does not have a directive principle like Article
45. Therefore, the contrary view was struck in San Antonio Independent School District
(supra).
53. While dealing with the American Law on this aspect in Vol. 57 1969 California Law
Review at page 380 it was stated:
It is true that the quotation from the Brown opinion seems stunningly relevant.
Taken literally it would be decisive in some sense upon the question of this
Article. Education "must be made available to all on equal terms." From the
vantage point of 1968, however, it is no longer clear that Brown was specially
concerned about the interest in education. The decision had scarcely 1 appeared
before the "fundamental" character of education become the fundamental
character of golf and swimming rights, and all the cases since Brown, even the
cases involving education, have shown complete preoccupation with the racial
factor. Meanwhile the Court has done nothing further to suggest that education
enjoys a constitutional life of its own.
54. As to the present position of primary education in India, the additional affidavit on
behalf of Union of India filed by Mr. H.C. Baveja, Assistant Education Advisor in the
Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India, Department of
Education, New Delhi, puts the position thus;
STATUS OF ELEMENTRY EDUCATION IN INDIA 1. Provision of free and compulsory education to all children until they
complete the age of 14 years is a Directive Principle of the Constitution.
Recognising he need for literate population and provision of elementary
education as crucial input for nation building, the policy of the Government has
been to provide all children the free and compulsory education at least upto
elementary level (primary and upper primary level). The 6th Five Year Plan
document made a serious reference to desirability of a time bound plan to
achieve universal enrolment. The 7th Plan conveyed a sense of urgency about
the need to achieve this objective. This was reinforced mid-way by the National
Policy on Education, 1986. PROGRESS OVER THE YEARS: 2.
Concerted efforts to reach the target has led to manifold increase in
institutions, teachers and students as shown in the. table below: 3. This increase provided Indian Education System with one of the largest
systems in the world, providing accessibility within 1 km walking distance of
Primary schools to 8.26 lakhs habitations containing about 94% of the country's
population. Growth in enrolment in the decade of 80s showed an acceleration
that has now brought enrolment rates close of 100% at primary stage. FREE EDUCATION: 4.
In the endeavor to increase enrolment and achieve the target of UEE, all
State Governments have abolished tuition fees in Government Schools run by
local bodies and private aided institutions is mostly free in these States.
However, in private unaided schools which constitute 3.7% of the total
elementary schools in the country, some fee is charged. Thus, overall, it may
be said that education upto elementary level in practically all schools is free.
Other costs of education such as text books, unforms, school bags, transport
etc. are not borne by States except in a very few cases by way of incentives to
children of indigent families or those belonging to Scheduled Caste/Schedule
Tribes categories, The reason why the State Government are unable to bear this
additional expenditure is that 96% of expenditure on elementary education goes
in meeting the salaries of teaching and non-teaching staff. COMPULSORY
EDUCATION 5. 14 States and 4 Union Territories have enacted legislation to make education
compulsory but the socio-economic compulsions that keep the children away
from schools have restrained them from prescribing the rules and regulations
whereby those provisions can be endorsed.
55. Thus, it has to be concluded that the right to free education upto the age of 14
years is a fundamental right.
56. The next question is whether there is a fundamental right to establish an
educational institution. That takes us to Article 19(1)(g). That reads as follows:
to practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business, 57. The question now is: what is the meaning to be attributed to the words
"profession", "occupation", "trade" or "business".
58. In P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Law Lexicon Reprint Edition 1987 at page 897 "Occupation"
means:
The principal business of one's life, vocation, calling, trade, the business which
a man follows to procure a living or obtain wealth: that which occupies or
engages one's time or attention, vocation, employment, calling, trade; the
business in which a man is usually engaged, to the knowledge of his neighbour.
59. According to Black's Law Dictionary Fifth Edition at page 973 "Occupation" means:
Possession; control; tenure; use. The act or process by which real property is
possessed and enjoyed. Where a person exercises physical control over land.
That which principally takes up one's time thought, and energies, especially,
one's regular business or employment; also, whatever one follows as the means
of making a livelihood. Particular business, profession, trade, or calling which
engages individual's time and efforts; employment in which one regularly
engages or vocation of his life.
60. In P.V.G. Raju v. Commissioner of Expenditure 36 ITR . 267 it is observed thus:
The activity termed as "Occupation", if of wider import than vocation or
profession. It is also distinct from a hobby which can be resorted to only in
leisure hours for the purpose of killing time. Occupation, therefore, is that with
which a person occupies himself either temporarily or permanently or for a
considerable period with continuity of activity. It is analogous to a business,
calling or pursuit. A person may have more than one occupation in a previous
year. The Occupations may be seasonal or for the whole year.
Firstly, there can be a business, profession, vocation or occupation without any
profit motive or on "no profit on loss basis". To, illustrate, co-operative
societies or mutual insurance companies may carry on business without earning
any income or without any profit motive. The vocation or occupation to do
social service of various kinds for the uplift of the people would also come
under this category. The profit motive or earning of income is not an essential
ingredient to constitute the activity, termed as business, profession, vocation or
occupation.
If any authority is needed, we find it in Commissioner of Expenditure Tax v. Mrs. Manorama Sarabhai MANU/GJ/0094/1962 : [1966]59ITR262(Guj) wherein it was held that the educational activities of the assesses amounted to an
occupation within the meaning of Section 5(a) and that no profit motive is
necessary to treat an activity as a vocation or occupation within the meaning of
Section 5(a). For all these reasons, we must negative this submission of Mr.
Ramarao relating to the interpretation of the words "business, profession,
vocation or occupation" in Section 5(a) of the Act.
61. In P.K. Menon v. Income Tax Commissioner MANU/SC/0057/1958 : 1959 Supp. (1)
SCR 133 this Court ved as follows:
We find no difficulty in thinking that teaching is a vocation if not a profession.
It is plainly so and it is not necessary to discuss the various meanings of the
word "vocation" for the purpose or to cite authorities to support this view. Nor
do we find any reason why, if teaching is a vocation, teaching of Vedanta is
not. It is just as much teaching and therefore, a vocation, as any other
teaching. It is said that in teaching Vedanta the appellant was only practising
religion. We are unable to see why teaching of Vedanta as a matter of religion
is not carrying on of a vocation.
It is said that as the word "Vocation" has been used along with the words
"business" and "profession" and the object of business and profession, is to
make a profit, only such activities can be included in the word "Vocation" the
object of which likewise is to make a profit. We think that these contentions
lack substance. We do not appreciate the significance of saying that in order to
become a vocation an activity must be organised. If by that a continuous, or as
was said, a systematic activity, is meant, we have to point out that it is well
known that a single act may amount to the carrying on of a business or
profession.
62. The meaning of "business" can be gathered from Law Lexicon Edition 1987 by
Ramnath Iyer:
Business is that which engages the time, talent and interest of a man" and is
what a man proposes to himself. There may be a "Business" without pecuniary
profit being at all contemplated.
Business" and "Trade: "Business" has a more extensive meaning than
"Trade", (per Willes, J. Hariis v. Amery 35 C.P. 92 But "Ordinarily
speaking, Business is synonymous with "Trade", (per Chatterton V.C.
Delany v. Deleny, 15 L.R. Ir. 67 . There may, however, be a "Business"
without pecuniary profit being at all contemplated. In such connection,
"Business" is a very much larger word than "Trade" and the word
"Business" is employed in order to include occupations which would
not strictly come within the meaning of the word "Trade" (per person,
J. Rolls -vs- Miller, 53 LJ. Ch. 101 per Scruitton. L.J. The words
"Trade" and "Business" do not mean the same thing...on business,
though usually business is carried on for profit. It is to be presumed
that the Railways are run on a profit, though it may be that occasionally
they are run at a loss.
Monetary consideration for service is, therefore, not an essential
characteristic of industry in a modern State.
63. In Hindustan Steel Limited v. State of Orissa MANU/SC/0418/1969 : [1972]83ITR26(SC) it is observed: A person to be a dealer within the meaning of the Act must carry on the
business of selling or supplying goods in Orissa. The expression "business" is
not defended in the Act. But as observed by this Court in State of Andhra Pradesh -vs- Abdul Bakshi MANU/SC/0259/1964 : [1964]7SCR664 .: The expression "business" though extensively used as a word of
indefinite import, in taxing statutes it is used in the sense of an
occupation, or profession which occupies the time, attention and labour
of a person, normally with the object of making profit. To regard an
activity as business there must be a course of dealings, either actually
continued or contemplated to be continued with a profit motive, and no
for sport of pleasure.
In Barendra Prasad Ray v. The Income Tax Officer MANU/SC/0282/1981 : [1981]129ITR295(SC) B & H & 401 A & B it is observed: The expression "business" does not necessarily mean trade or manufacture
only. It is being used as including within its scope profession, vocations and
callings from a fairly long time. The shorter Oxford English Dictionary defines
"Business" as stated occupation, profession or trade" and a man of business" is
defined as meaning "an attorney" also. In view of the above dictionary meaning
of the word "business" it cannot be said that the definition of business given in
Section 45 of the Partnership Act, 1890 (53 & 54 Viet. C. 39) was an extended
definition intended for the purpose of that Act only. Section 45 of that ACt says:
The expression "Business" includes every Trade, occupation, or
profession.
Section 2(b) of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 also defines
"Business" thus:
Business" includes every trade, occupation and profession.
The observation of Rowlatt, J. in Christopher Barker & Sons, v.
Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1919) 2 KB 222 . "All professions are
businesses, but all businesses are not professions,..." also supports the
view that professions are generally regarded as business. The same
learned Judge in an other case Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs.
Marine Steam Turbine Co. Ltd. (1920) 1. KB. 193 held:
The word "Business" however is also used in another and a.
very different sense, as meaning an active occupation or
profession continuously carried on and it is in this sense the
word is used in the Act with which we are here concerned".
"The word "Business" is one of wide import and it means an
activity carried on continuously systematically by a person by
the application of his labour skill with a view to earning an
income. We are of the view that in the context in which the
expression "business" is used in Section 9(1) of the Act, there
is no warrant for giving a restricted meaning to it excluding
professional connections from its scope.
64. In each of these cases, depending upon the statute, either "occupation" or
"business" has to be defined. Certainly, it cannot be contended that establishment of an
educational institution would be "business". Nor again, could that be called trade since
no trading activities carried on. Equally, it is not a profession. It is one thing to say that
teaching is a profession but it is a totally different thing to urge that establishment of an
educational institution would a profession. It may perhaps fall under the category of
occupation provided no recognition is sought from the State or affiliation from the
University is asked on the basis that it is a fundamental right. This position is explained
below: 65. However, some of the learned Counsel relied on Bangalore Water Supply and
Sewerage Board vs R. Rajappa MANU/SC/0257/1978 : (1978)ILLJ349SC to urge that the
activity of running an educational institution was an industry. In that case, Krishna Iyer,
J. observed:
To Christian education as a mission, even if true, is not to negate is being an
Industry, we have to look at education activity from the angle of the Act and so
viewed the ingredients of education are fulfilled. Education is, therefore, an
industry nothing can stand in the way of that Conclusion.
66. This ruling was relied on in Miss Sundarambai v. Government of Goa 1988 Supl. 1 SCR 6088
,. It was held:
Thus it is seen that even though an educational institution has to be treated as
an industry in view of the decision in the Bangalore Water Supply and
Sewerage Board v. R. Rajappa (supra) the question whether teachers in an
educational institution can be considered as workmen still remains to be
decided.
67. It requires to be carefully noted that while considering as to what would constitute
an industry under the Industrial Disputes Act, these observations came to be made.
Certainly, that is very different from claiming a fundamental right under Article 19(1) (g). 68.
Even on general principles, the matter could be approached this way. Educational
institutions can be classified under two categories: 1. Those requiring recognition by the State and 2. Those who do not require such a recognition.
69. It is not mere an establishment of educational institution, that is urged by the
petitioners, but, to run the educational institution dependant on recognition by the
State. There is absolutely no fundamental right to recognition in any citizen. The right
to establishment and run the, educational institution with State's recognition arises only
on the State permitting, pursuant to a policy decision or on the fulfilment of the
conditions of the Statute. Therefore, where it is dependent on the permission under the
Statute or the exercise of an executive power, it cannot qualify to be a fundamental
right. Then again, the State policy may dictate a different course.
70. The logical corollary of holding that a fundamental right to establish an educational
institution is available under Article 19(1)(g) would lead to the proposition, right to
establish a university also. In fact, this Court had occasion to point out in 5. Azeez Basha and Anr. v. Union of India MANU/SC/0039/1967 : [1968]1SCR833 at page 848 thus:
Before we do so we should like to say that the words "educational institutions"
are of very wide import and would include a university also. This was not
disputed on behalf of the Union of India and therefore it may be accepted that a
religious minority had the right to establish a university under Article 30(1).
The position with respect to the establishment of Universities before the
Constitution came into force in 1950 was this. There was no law in India which
prohibited any private individual or body from establishing a university and it
was therefore open to a private individual or body to establish a university.
There is a good deal in common between educational institutions which are not
universities and those which are universities. Both teach students and both
have teachers for the purpose. But what distinguishes a university from any
other educational institution is that a university grants degrees of its own while
other educational institutions cannot. It is this granting of degrees by a
university which distinguishes it from the ordinary run of educational
institutions. (See St. David's College, Lampeter v. Ministry of Education
1951 1. All E.R. 559 . Thus in law in India there was no prohibition so established it
must of necessity be granting degrees before it could be called a university. But
though such a university might be granting degrees it did not follow that the
Government of the country was bound to recognise those degrees.
71. If there is no fundamental right to establish a university a fortiori a fundamental
right to establish an educational institution is not available.
72. By implication also a fundamental right of the nature and character conferred under
Article 30 cannot be read into Article 19(1)(g). The conferment of such a right on the
minorities in a citizen of the country.
73. In Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society v. State of Gujarat MANU/SC/0088/1974
: [1975]1SCR173 it is observed:
The right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice has
been conferred on religious and linguistic minorities so that the majority who
can always have their right by having proper legislation do not pass a legislation
prohibiting minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice.
If the scope of Article 30(1) is made an extension of the right under
Article 29(1) as the right to establish and administer educational institutions for
giving religious instruction or for imparting education in their religious
teachings or tenets the fundamental right of minorities to establish and
administer educational institution of their choice will be taken away.
(Emphasis supplied)
At page. 192 it is observed:
Article 30 is a special to minorities to establish educational institutions of their
choice. This Court said that the two Articles create two separate right though it
is possible that the rights might meet is a given case.
The real reason embodied in Article 30(1) of the Constitution is the conscience
of the nation that the minorities, religious as well as linguistic, are not
prohibited from establishing and administering educational institutions of their
choice for the purpose of giving their children the best general education to
make them complete men and women of the country. The minorities are given
this protection under Article 30 in order to preserve and strengthen the integrity
and unity of the country. The sphere of general secular education is intended to
develop the commonness of boys and girls of our country. This is in the true
spirit of liberty, equality and fraternity through the medium of education. If
religious or linguistic minorities are not given protection under Article 30 to
establish and administer educational institutions I of their choice, they will feel
isolated and separate. General secular education will open doors [of perception
and act as the natural light of mind for our countrymen to live in the whole.
Then again, at page 224 it is observed:
The idea of giving some special right to the minorities is not to have a kind to
privileged or pampered section of the population but to give to the minorities a
sense of security and a feeling of confidence. The great leaders of India since
time immemorial had preached the doctrine of tolerance and catholicity of
outlook. Those noble ideas were enshrined in the Constitution. Special rights
for minorities were designed not to create inequality. Their real effect was to
bring about equality by ensuring the preservation of the minority institution and
by guaranteeing to the minorities autonomy in the matter of the administration
of these institutions. The differential treatment for the minorities by giving them
special rights is intended to bring about an equilibrium, so that the ideal of
equality may not be reduced to a more abstract idea but should become a living
reality and result in true, genuine equality, an equality not merely in theory but
also in fact. The majority in a system of adult franchise hardly needs any
protection. It can look after itself and protect its interests. Any measure wanted
by the majority can without much difficulty be brought on the statute book
because the majority can get that done by giving such a mandate to the elected
representatives.
It is only the minorities who need protection, and Article 30,
besides some other articles, is intended to afford and guarantee that protection.
(Emphasis supplied) 74. The argument that every activity or occupation by the mere fact of its not being
obnoxious ? harmful to society, cannot by itself be entitled to protection as fundamental
right. As pointed tit above, some rights, by the very nature, cannot be qualified to be
protected as fundamental rights.
75. Accordingly, it is held that there is no fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) to
establish 1 educational institution, if recognition or affiliation is sought for such an
educational institution. It may be made clear that any one desirous of starting an
institution purely for the purposes of educating the students he could do so but Sections 22 and 23 of the University Grants Commission which prohibits the award of degrees
excepts by a University must be kept in mind.
76. The next question which calls for determination is: does recognition or affiliation
make the educational institution an instrumentality? We propose to examine this
question with reference) the following cases.
77. In Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi MANU/SC/0498/1980 : (1981)ILLJ103SC it
was Observed:
The tests for determining as to when a corporation can be said to be an
instrumentality or agency of Government may now be called out from the
judgment in the International Airport Authority's case. These tests are not
conclusive or clinching, but they are merely indicative indicia which have to be
used with care and caution, because while stressing the necessity of a wide
meaning to be placed on the expression "other authorities", it must be realised
that it should not be stretched so far as to bring in every autonomous body
which has some nexus with the Government within the sweep of the
expression. A wide enlargement of the meaning must be tempered by a wise
limitation. We may summarise the relevant tests gathered from the decision in
the International Airport Authority's case as follows:
(1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of the corporation
is held by Government it would go a long way towards indicating that
the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government.
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet
almost entire expenditure of the corporation, it would afford some
indication of the corporation being impregnated with governmental
character.
(3) It may also be a relevant factor...whether the corporation enjoys
monopoly status which is the State conferred or State protected.
(4) "Existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford and
indication that the Corporation is a State agency or instrumentality.
(5) If the functions of the corporation of public importance and closely
related to governmental functions, it would be a relevant factor in
classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of
Government.
(6) Specifically, if a department of Government is transferred to a
corporation, it would be a strong factor supportive of this inference of
the corporation being an instrumentality or agency of Government.
If on a consideration of these relevant factors it is found that the corporation is
an instrumentality or agency of government, it would, as pointed out in the
International Airport authority's case, be an 'authority' and, therefore, 'State'
within the meaning of the expression in Article 12.
We find that the same view has been taken by Chinnappa Reddy, J. in a
subsequent decision of this Court in the U.P. Warehousing Corporation v. Vijay
Narain MANU/SC/0432/1980 : (1980)ILLJ222SC and the observations made by
the learned Judge in that case strongly reinforced the view we are taking
particularly in the matrix of our constitutional system.
78. Ranganath Mishra, J. (as he then was), speaking for the Court, after a succinct
analysis of the entire case law on the subject concludes in Tekraj Vasandi v. Union of India MANU/SC/0154/1987 : (1988)ILLJ341SC as under: We have several cases of societies registered under Societies Registration Act
which have been treated as State' but in each of those cases it would appear on
analysis that either governmental business had been undertaken by the Society
or what was expected to be the public obligation of the State' had been
undertaken to be performed as a part of the Society's function. In a Welfare
State, as has been pointed out on more than one occasion by this Court,
governmental control is very pervasive and in fact touches all aspects of social
existence. In the absence of a fair application of the tests to be made, there is
possibility of turning every non-government society into an agency or
instrumentality of the State. That obviously would not serve the purpose and
may be far from reality. A broad picture of the matter has to taken and a
discerning mind has to be applied keeping the realities and human experiences
in view so as to reach a reasonable conclusion. Having given our anxious
consideration to the facts of this case, we are not in a position to hold that ICPS
is either an agency or instrumentality of the State so as to come within the
purview of "other authorities' in Article 12 of the Constitution. We must say that
ICPS is a case of its type - typical in many ways and the normal tests may
perhaps not properly apply to test its character.
79. The same learned Judge, after referring to the tests adumberated in Ajay Hasia
(supra), holds in All India Sainik Schools Employees' Ass. v. Sainik Schools Society
MANU/SC/0014/1988 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 205:
...that the Sainik School Society is also 'State' The entire funding is by the State
Governments and the Central Government. The overall control vests in the
governmental authority. The main object of the Society is to run schools and
prepare students for the purpose of feeding the National Defence Academy.
Defence of the country is one of the regal functions of the State.
80. Applying these tests, we find it impossible to hold that a private educational
institution the recognition or affiliation to the university could ever be called an
instrumentality of State, Recognition is for the purposes of conforming to the standards
laid down by the State. Affiliation I regard to the syllabi and the course of study. Unless
and until they are in accordance with the prescription of the university, degrees would
not be conferred. The educational institutions the students for the examination
conducted by the university. Therefore, they are obliged the syllabi and the course of
the study.
81. As a sequel to this, an important question arises: what is the nature of functions
discharged these institutions? They discharge a public duty. If a student desires to
acquire a degree, for example, in medicine, he will have to route through a medical
college. These medical colleges are he instruments to attain the qualification. If,
therefore, what is discharged by the educational 15 Institution, is a public duty that
requires, duty to act fairly.
82. In such a case, it will be subject to Article 14. Shri Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree
Muktajee Vandas Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Samarak Trust v. V.R. Rudani
MANU/SC/0028/1989 : (1989)IILLJ324SC is an interesting case where a writ of
mandamus was issued a private college. In paragraph 12 at page 697 it was held:
The essence of the attack on the maintainability of the writ petition under
Article 226 may now be examined. It is argued that the management of the
college being a trust registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act is not
amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court. The contention in other
words, is that the trust is a private institution against which no writ of
mandamus can be issued. In support of the contention, the counsel relied upon
two decisions of this Court: (1) Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College,
Shamli v. Lakshmi Narain MANU/SC/0052/1979 and (b) Deepak Kumar Biswas
v. Director of Public Instructions MANU/SC/0621/1987 : (1987)ILLJ516SC . In
the first of the two cases, the respondent institution was a Degree College
managed by a registered co-operative society. A suit was filed against the
college by the dismissed principal for reinstatement. It was contended that the
Executive Committee of the college which was registered under the Co-
operative Societies Act and affiliated to the Agra University (and subsequently
to Meerut University) was a statutory body. The importance of this contention
lies in the fact that in such as case, reinstatement could be ordered if the
dismissal is in violation of statutory obligation. But this Court refused to accept
the contention. It was observed that the management of the college was not a
statutory body since not created by or under a statute. It was emphasised that
an institution which adopts certain statutory provisions will not become a
statutory body and the dismissed employee cannot enforce a contract of
personal service against a non-statutory body.
At paragraphs 15 to 20 it was held:
If the rights are purely of a private character no mandamus can issue. If the
management of the college is purely a private body with no public duty
mandamus will not lie. These are two exceptions to mandamus. But once these
are absent and when the party has no other equally convenient remedy,
mandamus cannot be denied. It has to be appreciated that the appellants-trust
was managing the affiliated college to which public money is paid as
government aid' Public money paid as government aid plays a major role in the
control, maintenance and working of educational institutions. The added
institutions like government institutions discharge public function by way of
imparting education to students. They are subject to the rules and regulations
of the affiliating University. Their activities are closely supervised by the
University authorities. Employment in such institutions, therefore, is not devoid
of any public character. (See the Evolving Indian Administrative Law by M.P.
Jain (1983) p. 226). So are the service conditions of the academic staff. When
the University takes a decision regarding their pay scales, it will be binding on
the management. The service conditions of the) academic staff are, therefore,
not purely of a private character. It has super-added protection' by University
decisions creating a legal right-duty relationship between he staff and the?
management. When there is existence of this relationship, mandamus cannot be
refused to the aggrieved party.
The law relating to mandamus has made the most spectacular advance. It may
be recalled that the remedy by prerogative writs in England started with very
limited scope and suffered from many procedural disadvantages. To overcome
the difficulties, Lord Gardiner (the Lord Chancellor) in pursuance of Section
3(1)(e) of the Law commission Act, 1965, requested the Law Commission "to
review the existing remedies for the judicial control of administrative acts and
omission with a view to evolving a simpler and more effective procedure". The
Law Commission made their report in March 1976 (Law Commission made their
report in March 1976 (Law Commission Report No. 73). It was implemented by
Rules of Court (Order 53) in 1977 and given statutory force in 1981 by Section 31 of the Supreme Court Act, 1981. It combined all the former remedies into
one proceeding called Judicial Review. Lord Denning explains' the scope of this
"judicial review":
At one stroke the courts could grant whatever relief was appropriate.
Not only certiorari and mandamus, but also declaration and injunction.
Even damages. The procedure was much more simple and expeditious.
Just a summons instead of a writ. No formal pleadings. The evidence
was given by affidavit. As a rule no cross-examination, no discovery,
and so forth. But there were important safeguards. In particular, in
order to qualify, the applicant had to get the leave of a judge.
The statute is phrased in flexible terms. It gives scope for development.
It uses the words "having regard to". Those words are very indefinite.
The result is that the courts are not bound band and foot by the
previous law. They are to "have regard to it. So the previous law as to
who are and who are not - public authorities, is not absolutely binding.
Nor is the previous law as to the matters in respect of which relief may
be granted. This means that the judges can develop the public law as
they think best. That they have done and are doing. (See The Closing
Chapter by Rt. Hon. Lord Denning p. 122).
There, however, the prerogative writ of mandamus is confide only to public
authorities to compel performance of public duty. The 'public authority' for
them mean every body which is created by statute-and whose powers and
duties are defined by statute. So government departments, local authorities,
police authorities, and statutory undertakings and corporations, are all 'public
authorities'. But there is no such limitation for our High Courts to issue the writ
in the nature of mandamus'. Article 226 confers wide powers on the High
Courts to issue writs in the nature of prerogative writs. This is a striking
departure from the English law. Under Article 226, writs can be issued to "any
person or authority". It can be issued "for the enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights and for any other purpose.
Article 226 reads: 226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs. - (I) Notwithstanding
anything in Article 32, r every High Court shall have power, throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or
authority including in appropriate cases, any government, within those
territories directions, orders and writs, including writs in the nature of habeas
corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them,
for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part II and for any other
purpose.
The scope of this article has been explained by Subba Rao, J., In Dwarkanath v.
ITO 1965 3 SCR 535 :
This article is couched in comprehensive phraseology and it ex-facie confers a
wide power on the High Courts to reach injustice wherever it is found. The
Constitution designedly used a wide language in describing the nature of the
power, the purpose for which and the person or authority against whom it can
be exercised. It can issue writs in the nature of prerogative writs as understood
in England; but the scope of those writs also is widened by the use of the
expression "nature", for the said expression does not equate the writs that can
be issued in India with those in England, but only draws an analogy from them.
That apart, High Courts can also issue directions, orders or writs other than the
prerogative writs. It enables the High Court to mould the relies to meet the
peculiar and complicate requirements of this country. Any attempt to equate the
scope of the power of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution with
that of the English courts to issue prerogative writs is to introduce the
unnecessary procedural 'restrictions grown over the years in a comparatively
small country like England with a unitary form of government into a vast
country like India functioning under a federal structure. Such a construction
defeat the purpose of the article itself.
The term "authority" used in Article 226 the context must receive a liberal
meaning unlike the term in Article 12. Article 12 is relevant only for the purpose
of enforcement of fundamental right under Article 32. Article 226 confers power
on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement of the fundamental rights as
well as non-fundamental rights. The words "any person or authority" used in
Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and
instrumentalities of the State. They may cover any other person or body
performing public duty. The form of the body concerned is not very much
relevant. What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body. The
duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed by the person or
authority to the affected party. No matter by what means the duty is imposed, if
a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.
83. The emphasis in this case is as to the nature of duty imposed on the body. It
requires to be observed that the meaning of authority under Article 226 came to be laid
down distinguishing lithe same term from Article 12. In spite of it, if the emphasis is on
the nature of duty on the same principle it has to be held that these educational
institutions discharge public duties. Irrespective of the educational institutions receiving
aid it should be held that it is a public duty. The absence of aid does not detract from
the nature of duty.
84. In R v Panel on Take-Overs 1987(1) All E R 564 it is observed: "The principle issue
in this appeal, and the only issue which may matter in the longer term, is whether this
remarkable body is above law. Its respectability is beyond question. So is its bona
fides. I don not doubt for one moment that it is intended to and does operate in the
public interest and that the enormously wide discretion which it aggregates to itself is
necessary if its is to function efficiently and effectively. While not wishing to become
involved in the political controversy on the relative merits of self-regulation and
governmental or statutory regulation, I am content to assume for the purposes of this
appeal that self-regulation is preferable in the public interest. But that said, what is to
happen if the panel goes off the rails? Suppose, perish the thought, that it were to use
its powers in a way in which was manifestly unfair. What then? Counsel for the panel
submits that the panel would lose the support of public opinion in the financial markets
and would be unable to continue to operate. Further or alternatively, Parliament could
and would intervene. Maybe, but how long would that take and who in the meantime
could or would come to the assistance of those who were being oppressed by such
conduct?"
At page 574 it is held:
The picture which emerges is clear. As an act of government it was decided
that, in relation to take-overs, there should be a central self-regulatory body
which would be supported and sustained by a periphery of statutory powers
and penalties wherever non-statutory powers and penalties were insufficient or
non-existent or where EEC requirements called for statutory provisions.
At page 577 it is held:
In fact given its novelty, the panel fits surprisingly well into the format which
this Court had in mind in R v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. It is
without doubt performing a public duty and an important one. This is clear from
the expressed willingness of the Secretary of State for Trade and of the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to limit legislation in the field of
takeovers and mergers and to use the panel as the centerpiece of his regulation
of that market. The rights of citizens are indirectly affected by its decisions,
some, but by no means all of whom, may in a technical sense be said to have
assented to this situation, 'e' 'g' the members of the Stock Exchange. At least in
its determination of whether there has been a breach of the code, it has a duty
to act, judicially and its asserts that its raison d'etre is to do equity between
one shareholder and another. Its source of power is only partly based on moral
persuasion and the assent of institutions and thirty members, the bottom line
being the statutory powers exercised by the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Bank of England. In this context I should be very disappointed if the
courts could not recognise the realities of executive power and allowed their
vision to the clouded by the subtlety and sometimes complexity of the way in
which it can be exerted.
Given that it is really unthinkable that, in the absence of legislation such as
affect trade unions, the panel should go on its way cocooned from the attention
of the courts, in defence of the citizenry, we sought to investigate whether it
could conveniently be controlled by established form of private law eg torts
such as actionable combinations in restraint of trade, and, to this end, pressed
counsel for the applicants to draft a writ. Suffice it to say that the result was
wholly unconvincing and, not surprisingly, counsel for the panel did not admit
that it would be in the least effective.
At page 584 it is held:
More recently in Rv. BBC, explavelle (1983) 1 All ER 2451 (1983) 1 WLR 23
Woolf J had to consider an application for judicial review where the relief
sought was an injunction under Order 53, Rule 1(2). The case was brought by
an employee of the BBC. In refusing relief Woolf J said (1983) 1 All ER 241 , 1983 1 WLR 23 :
Paragraph (2) of Rule 1 of Order 53 does not strictly confine applications for
judicial review to cases where an order for mandamus, prohibition or certiorari
could be granted. It merely required that the court should have regard to the
nature of the matter in respect of which such relief may be granted. However,
although applications for judicial review are not confined to those cases where
relief could be granted by way of prerogative order, I regard the wording of
Order 53, Rule 1(2) and Sub-section (2) of Section 31 of the Supreme Court
Act 1981 as making it clear that the application for judicial review is confined to
reviewing activities of a public nature as opposed to those of a purely private or
domestic character. The disciplinary appeal procedure set up by the BBC spends
purely on the contract of employment between the applicant and the BBC and
therefore it is a procedure of a purely private or domestic character.
Private Colleges and their role: 85. The Union of India takes the stand that the Central Government does not have the
resources undertake any additional financial responsibility for medical or technical
education. Taking the case of medical education, the total plan outlay of the health
sector in 3.2 per cent and medical education gets a prorata share after apportionment of
priorities and allocation of available funds. Priorities include promotions of primary
health, hospital services etc. The Government in particular is unable to aid any private
educational institution financially at levels higher than at present. Certain statistical
details regarding the cost of medical education have been given in the counter affidavit
of the Central Government. Paragraphs 5 to 9 of the affidavit may kindly be seen in this
connection.
86. It has, therefore, been the policy of the Central Government to involve private and
voluntary efforts in the sector of education in conformity with accepted norms and
goals. The consequences which will follow if private educational institutions have to
limit them selves structure which is charged in Government medical and technical
educational institutions been enumerated in paragraph 9 of the counter affidavit of the
Union of India.
87. The Central Government's policy on education was formulated in the year 1986.
Modifications were undertaken in 1992.
88. The relevant extract from the National Policy on Education, being paragraph 6.20,
10.1, 10.9 and 11.2 are set out herein below:
6.20
In the interests of maintaining standards and for several other valid
reasons, the commercialization of technical and professional education will be
curbed. An alternative system will be devised to involve private and voluntary
effort in this sector of education, in conformity with accepted norms and goals.
10.1
An overhaul of the system of planning and the management of education
will receive high priority. The guiding considerations will be:
a) Evolving a long-term planning and management perspective of
education and its integration with the country's developmental and
manpower needs:
b) Decentralisation and the creation of a spirit of autonomy for
educational institutions;
c) Giving pre-eminence to people's involvement, including association
of non-governmental agencies and voluntary effort;
d) Inducting more women in the planning and management of
education;
e) Establishing the principle of accountability in relation to given
objectives and norms." "10.9 Non-Government and voluntary effort
including social activist groups will be encouraged, subject to proper
management, and financial assistance provided. At the same time,
steps will be taken to prevent the establishment education.
11.2
Resources, to the extent possible will be raised by mobilising donations,
asking the beneficiary communities to maintain school buildings and supplies of
some consumables raising fees at the higher levels of education and effecting
some savings by the efficient use of facilities. Institutions involved with
research and the development of technical and scientific manpower should also
mobilize some funds by levying a cess or charge on the user agencies,
including Government departments, and entrepreneurs. All these measures will
I taken not only to reduce the burden on State resources but also for creating a
greater sense t responsibility within the educational system. However, such
measures will contribute only marginally to the total funding. The Government
and the community in general will find funds for such programmes as; he
universalization of elementary education; liquidating illiteracy; equality of
access to educational opportunities to all sections throughout the country;
enhancing the social relevance, quality and functional effectiveness of
educational programmes; generating knowledge and developing technologies in
scientific fields crucial to self-sustaining economic development and creating a
critical consciousness of the values and imperatives of national survival.
89. Therefore, as on today, it would be unrealistic and unwise to discourage private
initiative in providing educational facilities, particularly for higher education. The
private sector should be involved and indeed encouraged to augment the much needed
resources in the field of education, thereby making as much progress as possible in
achieving the constitutional goals in this respect. It could be concluded that the private
colleges are the felt necessities of time. That does not mean one should tolerate the
"so-called colleges" run in thatched huts with hardly any equipment, with no or
improvised laboratories, scarce facility to learn in an unhealthy atmosphere, far from
conducive to education. Such of them must be put down ruthlessly with an iron hand
irrespective of who has started the institution or who desires to set up such an
institution. They are poisonous weeds in the field of education. Those who venture are
financial adventurers without morals e scruples. Their only aim is to make money,
driving a hard bargain, exploiting eagerness to acquire a professional degree which
would be a passport for employment in a country rampant with unemployment. They
could be even called pirates in the high seas of education.
90. At this juncture, it is worthwhile to refer to the Resolution passed at the 48th All
Medical Conference:
Resolution No. 2
Racketeering in Medical Education:
Whereas, a number of institutions have sprung Up in the country that style
themselves:
Medical College; and
Whereas, such institutions charge large sums as capitation fees, a practice
which the Indian Medical Association and the Medical Council of India have
opposed a number of times; and Whereas, such institutions neither have
suitable buildings, nor proper equipment and even lack adequate staff of
requisite qualifications and further it has come to light that these institution's
swindle the public by taking large sums of money from students although these
institutions have not been recognized by the authorities;
This 48th All India Medical Conference urges upon the Governments to take
stringent measures against persons/institutions who/which run such medical
colleges and close them and recommend to the Medical Council of India not to
grant them recognition.
(48th Conference Dec. 29, 31, 1972 at Ahmedabad) 91. However, a word of caution requires to be uttered. Not all the private institutions
belong to this category. There are institutions which have attained great reputation by
devotion and by nurturing high educational standards. They surpass the colleges run by
the Government in many respects. They require encouragement. From this point of view
regulatory controls have to be continued and strengthened. The commercialisation of
education, the racketeering must be prevented. The State should strive its utmost in this
direction.
92. Regulatory measures must so ensure that private educational institutions maintain
minimum standards and facilities. Admission within all groups and categories should be
based on merit. There may be reservation of seats in favour of the weaker sections of
the society other groups which deserve special treatment. The norms for admission
should be pre-lined, objective and transparent.
93. Before the scheme, a question may arise whether a mandamus could issue for the
enforcement of scheme if proposed by the Court. For this, we may look up at Suman Gupta and Ors. v. State of J & K and Ors. MANU/SC/0074/1983 : [1983]3SCR985 : The Medical Council of India is directed to formulate a proper constitutional
basis for determining the selection of candidates for nomination to seats in
Medical Colleges outside the State in the light of the observations contained in
this judgement. Until a policy is so formulated and concrete criteria are
embodied in the procedure selected, the nominations shall be made by
selecting candidates strictly on the basis of merit, the candidates nominated
being those, in order of merit, immediately below the candidates selected for
admission to the Medical Colleges of the home State.
94. It cannot be gained that profiteering is an evil. If a public utility like electricity
could controlled, certainly, the professional colleges also require to be regulated.
95. In Kerala State Electricity Board v. S.N. Govinda Prabhu 1986 (3) SCR it is held:
It is a public utility monopoly undertaking which may not be driven by pure
profit motive not that profit is to be shunned but that service and not profit
should inform its actions. It is not the function of the Board to so manage its
affairs as to earn the maximum profit even as a private corporate body may be
inspired to earn huge profits with a view to paying large dividends to its
shareholders. But it does not follows that the Board may not and need not earn
profits for the purpose of performing its duties and discharging its obligations
under the statute. It stands to common sense that the Board must manage its
affairs on sound economic principles. Having ventured into the field of
Commerce, no public service undertaking can afford to say it will ignore
business principles which are as essential to public service undertakings as to
Commercial ventures.
At pages 650-51 it is held:
The Board may not allow its character as a public utility undertaking to be
changed into that of a profit motivated private trading or manufacturing house.
Neither the tariffs nor the resulting surplus may reach such heights as to lead to
the inevitable conclusion that the Board has shed its public utility character.
When that happens the Court may strike down the revision of tariffs as plainly
arbitrary.
96. In Oil and Natural Gas Commission and Anr. v. Association of Natural Gas
Consuming Industries of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0113/1990 : 1990CriLJ788 it is
held:
The notion that the 'cost plus' basis can be the only criterion for fixation of
prices in the case of public enterprises stems basically from a concept that such
enterprises should function either on a no profit no loss basis or on a minimum
profit basis. This is not a correct approach. In the case of vital commodities or
services, while private concerns must be allowed a minimal return on capital
invested, public undertakings or utilities may even have to run at losses, if need
be and even a minimal return may not be assured. In the case of less vital, but
still basic commodities, they may be required to cater to needs with a minimal
profit margin for themselves. But given a favourable area of operation,
"commercial profits" need not be either anathema or forbidden fruit even to
public sector enterprises.
97. In Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v. A.P.S.E.B MANU/SC/0340/1991 : [1991]2SCR643 it is
held:
This Court expressly rejected the submission which had found favour with the
Kerala High Court that in the absence of a specification by the State
Government, the position would be as it was before the 1978 amendment, that
is, the Board was to carry on its affairs and adjust the tariffs in such a manner
as not to incur a loss and no more. While rejecting the submission, this Court
held as under: SCC pp. 213-14, para 10)
We are of the view that the failure of the government to specify the surplus
which may be generated by the Board cannot prevent the Board from
generating a surplus after meeting the expenses required to be met Perhaps,
the quantum of surplus may not exceed what a prudent public service
undertaking may be expected to generate without sacrificing the interests it is
expected to serve and without being obsessed by the pure profit motive of the
private entrepreneur. The Board may not allow its character as a public utility
undertaking to be changed into that of a profit motivated private trading or
manufacturing house. Neither the tariffs nor the resulting surplus may reach
such heights as to lead to the inevitable conclusion that the Board has shed its
public utility character. When that happens the Court may strike down the
revision of tariffs as plainly arbitrary. But not until then. Not, merely because a
surplus which can by no means be said to be extravagant. The court will then
refrain from touching the tariffs. After all, as has been said by this Court often
enough price fixation is neither the forte nor the function of the court.
98. It cannot be contended that education must be available free and it must be run on
a charitable basis. In this connection, we may usefully quote P.R. Ganapathy Iyer's. The
Law relating to Hindu , and Mahomedan Endowments, as to the concept of charity which
is elastic. At page 46 of Chap. III it is stated:
A charitable establishment is a choultry, college, dispensary etc., while a
religious establishment is a mosque, temple etc. For these endowments may be
made.
At page 47 it is stated:
In English law the word "charity" has both a popular and as technical meaning.
The popular meaning of the word does not coincide with its legal or technical
meaning. Even according to the popular or ordinary meaning the word is used
in more senses than one. In a narrow and limited sense the ordinary
acceptation of the word is "relief of physical necessity or want". (Per Lord
Shand in Baird's Trustees v. (Lord Advocate 15 sess. Cas. 4th Series 682) In a
somewhat more extended sense, the ordinary and popular acceptation of the
word is "relief of poverty" and a charitable act or purpose" consists in relieving
poverty or want. (Ibid per Lord President (Inglis). In a still more extended
sense and in its popular and ordinary acceptation "charity" comprehends all
benefits, whether religious, intellectual or physical bestowed upon persons
who, by reason of their poverty, are unable to obtain such benefits for
themselves without assistance. (Per Lord Wastsom in Commissioners for special
purposes of Income Tax v. Pemsel (1891) A.C. 531 .
At page 49 it is stated:
Charity in its legal sense as understood in the English Law comprises four
principal divisions: (i) trusts for the relief of poverty; (2) trusts for the
advancement of education; (3) trusts for advancement of religion; (4) and
trusts for other purposes beneficial to the community not falling under any of
the preceding heads.
In B.K. Mukherjee on the Hindu Law of Religious and Charitable Trust at page 58 para
2.7A it is stated:
2.7A. Education - The second category of charitable trusts in Lord Mc-Naghten's
classification comprises trusts for education. These trusts need not be meant
exclusively for the poor. Of course, there must be a public purpose, something
tending to the benefit of the community. There must be general public benefit
through the advancement or furtherance of some educational purpose. But if
this important condition is satisfied, the scope of "education" would appear to
be fairly wide in several respects.
99. In St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi MANU/SC/0319/1992 : AIR1992SC1630 it is held: The educational institutions are not business houses. They do not generate
wealth. They cannot survive without public funds or private aid. It is said there
is also restraint on collection of students fees. With the restraint on collection
fees, the minorities cannot be saddled with the burden of maintaining
educational institutions without grant-in-aid. They do not have economic
advantage over others. It is not possible to have educational institutions
without State aid. This was also the view expressed by Das, C.J., in Kerala
Education Bill case MANU/SC/0065/1970 : [1971]1SCR734 . The minorities
cannot, therefore, be asked to maintain educational institutions on their own.
100. The time is not yet ripe to hold that education must be made available on a
charitable basis. It is true whenever trusts are made for advancement of education it
was held to be charitable purpose. In Special Commissioners of Income Tax v. Pemsel 3 Tax Cas 53
the dictum of Lord Macnaghten is as follows:
No doubt, the popular meaning of the words" charity" and "charitable" does not
coincide with their legal meaning, and no doubt it is easy enough to collect
from the books a few decisions which seem to push the doctrine of the Court to
the extreme, and to present a contrast between the two meanings in an aspect
almost ludicrous. But still it is difficult to fix the point of divergence, and no
one has yet succeeded in defining the popular meaning of the word "charity".
The learned Counsel for the Crown did not attempt the task. Even the
paraphrase of the Master of the Rolls is not quite satisfactory.... "Charity" in its
legal sense comprises four principle divisions: trusts for the relief of poverty,
trusts for the advancement of education, trusts for the advancement of religion,
and trusts for other purposes beneficial to the community not falling under any
of the preceding heads. The trusts last referred to are not the less charitable in
the eye of the law because incidentally they benefit the rich as well as the poor,
as indeed every charity that deserves the name must do, either directly or
indirectly.
101. The next case to which reference can be made is The King v. The Commissioner
for Special Purposes of the Income Tax
5 Tax cas 408
. The question arose whether the
University College of North Wales could be held as established for charitable purposes.
Fletcher Moulton, L.J. relying on Pemsel's case (supra) held that a trust for
advancement of education was charitable.
102. In The Abbey Malvern Wells, Ltd. v. Minister of Town and Country planning 1951 (2) I All E LR 154
it was held:
In the present case, it seems to me that one is entitled, and indeed, bound, to
look at the constitutional of the company to see who, in fact, is in control. I
find that, by Article 3 of the company's articles, the company is controlled
entirely by a body called a council, a, body of persons, and, by Article 64 that
body of persons must be the trustees of the trust deed. Therefore, while the
company, theoretically, has the power to apply its property and assets for the
purpose of making profits and devoting the resulting profit to the distribution of
dividend among the members, I find that the persons who regulate the
operations of the company are not free persons unrestricted in their operations,
but are the trustees of the trust deed, and, under the terms of the trust deed,
they may use the property of the company only in a particular way and." must
not make us of the assets of the company for the purpose of a profit-making
concern. I find that they are strictly bound by the trusts of the trust deed, and
that those trusts are charitable trusts. It seems to me, therefore, that, while
nominally the property of the company is held under the provisions of the
memorandum and articles of association, in actual fact the property of the
company is regulated by the terms of the memorandum and articles of
association plus the provisions of the trust deed, and, therefore, the company is
restricted in fact in application, of its property and assets and may apply them
only for the charitable purposes which are mentioned in the trust deed.
103. This may be so, for the purpose of defining charity, but, in a country like ours it is
impossible to hold that such theories could be advanced or implemented.
B.P. Jeevan Reddy , J. 104.
In these writ petitions, filed by private educational institutions engaged in or.
proposing to engage in imparting medical and engineering education - the correctness
of the decision rendered by a Division Bench comprising Kuldip Singh and R.M. Sahai,
JJ. in Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka and Ors. is called in question. The
petitioners, running medical/engineering colleges in the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, say that if Mohini Jain is correct and is
followed and implemented by the respective State Governments as indeed they are
bound to they will have to close down; no other option is left to them. It is, therefore,
necessary in the first instance to ascertain what precisely does the said decision lay
down.
105. The Karnataka Legislature enacted, in the year 1984, the Karnataka Educational
Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation fee) Act. The preamble to the Act recites:
An Act to prohibit the collection of capitation fee for admission to educational
institutions in the State of Karnataka and matters relating thereto;
Whereas the practice of collecting capitation fee for admitting students into
educational institutions is widespread in the State;
And whereas this undesirable practice beside contributing to large scale
commercialisation of education has not been conducive to the maintenance of
educational standards;
And whereas it is considered necessary to effectively curb this evil practice in
public interest by providing for prohibition of collection of capitation fee and
matters relating thereto;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-Fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows
Clause (b) of Section 2 defines the expression 'capitation fee' in the following words:
"2(b). "Capitation fee" means any amount, by whatever name called, paid or collected
directory or indirectly in excess of the fee prescribed under Section 5, but does not
include the deposit specified under the proviso to Section 3."
Section 3 prohibits collection of capitation fees by any educational institution or anyone
connected with its management, notwithstanding any other law for the time being in
force. The Section along with its proviso reads thus:
3. Collection of capitation fee prohibited. - Notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, no capitation fee shall be collected by or
on behalf of any educational institution or by any person who is incharge of or
is responsible for the management of such institution: Provided....
Section 5, which is the other provision referred to in the aforesaid definition reads as
follows: 5. Regulation of fees etc. - (1) It shall be competent for the Government, by
notification, regulate the tuition fee or any other fee or deposit or other amount
that may be received or classes of students.
(2) No education institution shall collect any fees or amount or accept deposits
in excess of the amounts notified under Sub-section (1) or permitted under the
proviso to Section 3. (3) Every educational institution shall issue an official receipt for the fee or
capitation fee or deposits or other amount collected by it.
(4) All monies received by any educational institution by way of fee or
capitation fee or deposits or other amount shall be deposited in the account of
the institution, in any Scheduled Bank and shall be applied and expended for
the improvement of the institution and the development of the educational
facilities and for such other related purpose and to such extent and in such
manner as may be specified by order by the Government.
(5) In order to carry out the purposes of Sub-section (4), the government may
require any education institution to submit their programmes or plans of
improvement and development of the institution for the approval of the
Government.
106. Section 4 provides for regulation of admission in the educational institutions in
the State, according to Sub-section (1), the maximum number of students for admission
that can be admitted a course of study and the minimum qualifications shall be fixed by
the Government. However, the case of a course of study in an institution maintained by
or affiliated to the University and t by the Government. Sub-sections (2) and (3) of
Section 4 pertain to "regulation of capitation fee during the period specified under the
proviso to Section 3. In view of their importance, these sub-sections may be set out in
full:
(2) in order to regulate the capitation fee charged or collected during the period
specified f under the proviso to Section 3, the government may, from time to
time, by general or special order, specify in respect of each private educational
institution or class or classes of such institutions.
(a) the number of seats set apart as Government seats:
(b) the number of seats that may be filled up by the management of
such institution,
(i) from among Karnataka students on the basis of merit, oh
payment of such cash deposits refundable after such number of
years, with or without interest as may be specified therein, but
without the payment of capitation fee; or
(ii) at the discretion:
Provided that such number of seats as may be specified by the
Government but not less than fifty percent of the total number of seats
referred to in the Clauses (a) and (b) shall be filled from among
Karnataka students.
Explanation - For the purpose of this section Karnataka students means
persons who have studied in such educational institutions in the State
of Karnataka run or recognised by the Government and for such
number of years as the government may specify;
(3) an educational institution required to fill seats in accordance with item (i) of
Sub-clause (b) of Clause (2) shall form a committee to select candidates for
such seats. A nominee each of the Government and the University to which
such educational institution is affiliated shall be included as members of such
committee.
These two sub-sections, in short, say: (i) it shall be open to the Government to specify
the number of seats that may be set apart as "Government seats" in any private
educational institution or in a class or classes of such institutions; (ii) The Government
can also specify that out of the seats to be filled by the Management (Management
quota), a particular number of seats may be filled from among Karnataka students, on
the basis of merit on payment of such refundable deposit as may be prescribed; The
Government can also specify the number of seats that may be filled at, the discretion of
the management. (It is obvious that if the seats to be filled on the basis of merit
refundable deposit are not specified, all the seats other than "Government seats" can be
filled at the discretion of the management;) (iii) the number of Karnataka students'
(which expression is defined by the explanation) should not be less than 50% over-all;
(iv) in case, the number of seats to be filled on merit-cum-refundable deposit are
specified, a selection committee, as contemplated by Sub-section (3) has to be formed
for making the selection. The expression "Government seats" is defined in Clause (e) of
Section 2 in following words:
(e). "government Seats" means such number of seats in such educational
institution or class or classes of such institutions in the state as the Government
may, from time to time, specify for being filled up by it in such manner as may
be specified by it by general or special order on the basis of merit and
reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and such
other categories, as may be specified, by the Government from time to time,
without the requirement of payment of capitation fee or cash deposit.
107. In exercise of the power conferred by Section 5 of the Act, the Government of
Karnataka issued a notification on June 5, 1989. It provided that from the academic
year 1989-90, the fees payable in private medical colleges shall be Rs. 2,000/- p.a. in
case of students admitted against "government Seats" (the same as in the government
Medical Colleges), Rs. 25,000/- in the case of other Karnataka students and Rs.
60,000/- in the case of non-Karnataka students.
5. Miss Mohini Jain, a non-Karnataka student (she was from Meerut in Uttar
Pradesh) applied for admission in M.B.B.S. course in one of the private medical
colleges in Karnataka. She was informed by the college that if she pays Rs.
60,000/- towards the first year's tuition fee and furnishes a Bank guarantee for
the fees payable for the remaining years of the M.B.B.S. course, she will be
admitted. Her parents were not in a position to pay the same and hence she
could not be admitted. Her further case, which was denied by the Management
of the college, was that she was asked to pay a capitation fee of Rs. 4,50,000/-
as a condition of admission. She approached I this Court under Article 32
challenging the aforesaid notification of the Karnataka Government I and asking
for a direction to be admitted on payment of the same fee as was payable by
the Karnataka students admitted against the "Government Seats".
108. The bench which heard and disposed of the writ petition framed four questions as
arising for its consideration viz., (i) Is there a 'right to education' guaranteed to the
people of India under the Constitution? If so, does the concept of 'capitation fee' infarct
the same? (ii) Whether the charging of capitation fee in consideration of admission to
educational institutions is arbitrary, unfair, unjust and as such violates the equality
clause contained in Article 14 of the Constitution? (iii) Whether the impugned
notification permits the Private Medical Colleges to charge capitation fee in the guise of
regulating fees under the Act? and (iv) Whether the notification is violative of the
provisions of the Act which in specific terms prohibits the charging of capitation fee by
any educational institution in the State of Karnataka?
109. On the first question, the Bench held, on a consideration of Articles 21, 38, 39(a)
and (f), 41 and 45 of the constitution:
(a) the framers of the Constitution made it obligatory for the State to provide
education for citizens";
(b) the objectives set forth in the preamble to the Constitution cannot be
achieved unless education is provided to the citizens of this country;
(c) the preamble also assures dignity of the individual. Without education,
dignity of the individual cannot be assured;
(d) Parts III and IV of the Constitution are supplementary to each other. Unless
the 'right to education' mentioned in Article 41 is made a reality, the
fundamental rights in part III will remain beyond the reach of the illiterate
majority;
(e) Article 21 has been interpreted by this Court to include the right to live with
human dignity and all that goes along with it. "The "right to education' flows
directly from right to life." In other words, 'right to education' is concomitant to
the fundamental rights enshrined in part II the Constitution. The State is under
a constitutional mandate to provide educational Institutions at all levels for the
benefit of citizens." The benefit of education cannot be confined to richer
classes.
(f) Capitation fee is nothing but a consideration for admission. The concept of
"teaching hops" is alien to our Constitutional scheme. Education in India has
never been a commodity for sale.
(g) "We hold that every citizen has a "right to education' under the
Constitution. The State is under an obligation to establish educational
institutions to enable the citizens to enjoy the said right. The State may
discharge its obligation through state-owned for state-recognized educational
institutions. When the State Government grants recognition to the private
educational institutions it creates an agency to fulfill its obligation under the
Constitution. The students are given admission to the educational institutions -
whether state-owned or state-recognised - in recognition of their "right to
education' under the Constitution. Charging capitation fee in consideration of
admission to educational institutions, is a patent denial of citizen's right to
education under the Constitution.
110. On the second question, the bench held that "the State action in permitting
capitation fee be charged by state-recognised educational institutions is wholly arbitrary
and as such violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.... The Capitation fee
brings to the fore a clear class bias." Admission of no meritorious students by charging
capitation fees - in any form whatsoever strikes at the very root of the constitutional
scheme and our educational system. D.P. Joshi does not come to the rescue of the
private institutions.
111. On the third question, the Bench held that having regard to the scheme of the Act,
charging of Rs. 60,000/- for admission is "nothing but a capitation fee". The private
medical colleges have further been given a free hand in the matter of admission of non-
Karnataka students irrespective merit. It held further: "if the State Government fixes Rs.
2000 per annum as the tuition fee in government colleges and for "Government Seats"
in private medical colleges then it is the state responsibility to see that any private
college which has been set up with Government permission being run with Government
recognition is prohibited from charging more than Rs. 2000 from any student who may
be resident of any part of India. When the State Government permits private medical
college to be set up and recognises its curriculum and degrees then the said college is
performing a function which under the Constitution has been assigned to the State
Government. We are therefore of the view that Rs. 60,000 per annum permitted to be
charged from Indian students from outside Karnataka in Para 1 (d) of the notification is
not tuition fee but in fact a capitation fee and as such cannot be sustained and is liable
to be struck down."
112. The notification impugned was accordingly held to be outside the scope of the Act
and bad. (It was declared that the judgment shall not be applicable to foreign students
and N.R.Is.). The writ petition was allowed accordingly but Mohini Jain was denied
admission since "she was not admitted to the college on merit and secondly the course
commenced in March-April, 1991". (The decision was rendered on 30.7.1992). It was
directed that the said decision shall have only prospective operation and shall not affect
the admissions already made in accordance with the said notification.
It is the above prepositions that have provoked this batch of writ petitions.
113. Mohini Jain was followed by a Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Kranti Sangram Parishad v. N.J. Reddy MANU/AP/0272/1992 : 1992(3)ALT99 . The
Respondents in those writ petitions including the State of Andhra Pradesh have filled a
number of S.L.Ps. seeking leave to appeal against the said judgment. In the said
S.L.Ps., certain issues peculiar to those matters arise, which we are not dealing with
herein. This decision is concerned mainly with the correctness of Mohini Jain and the
following three questions, which were framed by us at the hearing. The three questions
are:
(1) Whether the Constitution of India guarantees a fundamental right to
education to its citizens?
(2) Whether a citizen of India has the fundamental right to establish and run an
education institution under Article 19(1)(g) or any other provision in the
Constitution?
(3) Whether the grant of permission to establish and the grant of affiliation by a
University imposes an obligation upon an educational institution to act fairly in
the matter of admission of the students?
Before we deal with the above questions, it would be appropriate to notice the legal and
relevant factual position obtaining in three others States, namely Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra and Tamil nadu. All the matters before us arise from these four States only.
Notice in these matters were however directed to all the States in the country. None has
appeared excepting the above four States.
ANDHRA PRADESH 114. The Andhra Pradesh Education Act, 1982 was enacted by the State Legislature
with a view to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the educational system in the
State of Andhra Pradesh, for reforming, organising and developing the said educational
system and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental therewith. By virtue
of Sub-section (3) of Section 1, it applies to all education institutions and tutorial
institutions in the State except those governed by the University Acts or the A.P.
Intermediate Education Act, 1971. Section 2 defines certain expressions occurring in the
Act. Clause (11) defines the expression 'college' to include a medical college established
or maintained and administered by or affiliated to or associated with or recognised by
any University in the State, Clause (18) defines 'educational institution to mean
recognised schools and colleges including Medical Colleges. Chapter-VI (Sections 18 to
33) deals with establishment of educational institutions, their administration and
control. Section 18 says that Government may, for the purpose of implementing the
provisions of the Act, provide adequate facilities for imparting education either by
establishing and maintaining educational institutions by itself or by permitting any local
authority or private body of persons to establish and maintain educational institutions.
Section 19 classifies the educational institutions into (a) State institutions (b) local
authority institutions and (c) private institutions. Section 20 deals with grant of
permission for establishment of educational institutions. It says that the competent
authority (as defined in Clause (12) of Section 2) shall from time to time conduct a
survey to identify the educational needs of the ' under its jurisdiction and notify in the
prescribed manner through the local newspapers for applications from the educational
agencies desirous of establishing educational institutions. In pursuance of such
notification, applications may be filed either by existing institutions or new institutions
as also by local authorities for establishment of new institutions expansion of the
existing ones. Sub-section (3) prescribes the requirements which have to be satisfied by
an applicant, the matters with respect to which the competent authority has satisfied
before grant of permission and the steps that have to be taken by the person (to whom
the permission is granted) within the specified period. According to the sub-section, an
application has to be accompanied by (1) title deeds relating to the site for building,
play-grounds and garden proposed to be provided. (2) Plans approved by the local
authorities concerned which shall conform to the rules prescribed there for and (3)
documents evidencing availability of the financing needed for constructing the proposed
buildings. The Authority satisfied before granting the permission that there is a need for
providing educational titles to the people in the locality, that there is adequate financial
provision for continued Efficient maintenance of the institution as prescribed by the
competent authority and that the institution is proposed to be located in sanitary and
healthy surroundings. The authority or the body of persons to whom the permission is
granted has to appoint the teaching staff qualified according to the rules made by the
Government in this behalf and other requirements laid down by the Act, rules and the
orders made there under, within the period specified by the authorities. In default of
such compliance, it shall be competent to authority to cancel the permission. Sub-
section (4) makes it punishable for anyone to Wish an educational institution otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of the Anyone running an institution after
cancellation of the permission is also punishable.
115. Section 20-A declares that on and from the commencement of the A.P. Education
(Amendment) Act, 1987, no individual shall establish a private institution. The
institutions already established by individuals however are not affected by the said
provision. Sectional With grant and withdrawal of recognition of institution. It provides
that the competent authority may by order in writing grant recognition to an educational
institution permitted to established under Section 20 subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed in regard to the accommodation, equipment, appointment of teaching
staff and so on. It further provides the any local authority or other private educational
institution fails to fulfill all or any of the conditions of recognition or commits any of the
other irregularities mentioned in Sub-section (2), its recognition may be withdrawn. It
is not necessary to notice the other provisions Act.
116. In the year 1983, the Legislature of Andhra Pradesh enacted the Andhra Pradesh
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act,
1983. The Act was made to provide for regulation of admission into educational
institutions and to prohibit collection of capitation fee in the State of Andhra Pradesh. It
would be appropriate to notice the Preamble to the Act. It reads:
Whereas the undesirable practice of collecting capitation fee at the time to
admitting students educational institutions is on the increase in the State;
whereas, the said practice has been contributing to large scale
commercialisation of Education;
And whereas, it is considered necessary, to effectively curb this evil practice in
order to avo frustration among the meritorious and indigent students and to
maintain excellence in I students of education;
Be it enacted the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh in the Thirty fourth
year of the Republic of India as follows: 117. The Act was brought into force on and with effect from 30th January, 1983.
Section 2 contains the interpretation Clause. Clause (b) defines the expression
"Capitation fee" to me any amount collected in excess of the fee prescribed under
Section 7. Section 3 provides t admission into educational institutions in the State shall
be made on the basis of the marks obtained in the qualifying examination or on the
basis of the ranking assigned in the entrance test conducted by such authority and in
such manner as may be prescribed. So far as Medic and Engineering Colleges are
concerned, it is provided that admission thereto shall be exclusively on the basis of the
ranking assigned in the entrance test. The State has also reserved to itself the power to
specify seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Back ward classes. Section 4 provides that even a minority educational institutions shall have to admit students on
the basis of merit while admitting the students belonging to that minority or other
students. Section 5 prohibits the capitation fee. It says "the collection of any capitation
fee any educational institution or by any person who is incharge of or is responsible for
1 management of the institution is hereby prohibited." Sections 6 says that any
donations made to educational institution shall be made only in the prescribed manner
and not otherwise that the money so received shall be deposited and applied in the
prescribed manner.
Section-7 regulates the fee that can be changed by an education institution. It would
appropriate to read the section here in its entirety: 7. (1) "It shall be competent for the Government by notification, to regulate the
tuition feel any other fee that may be levied and collected by and educational
institution in respect of e class of students.
(2) No educational institution shall collect any fees in excess of the fee notified
under Sub-section (1).
(3) Every educational institution shall issue an official receipt for the fee
collected by it;
Section 9 provides for penalties in case of contravention of the provisions of the Act.
punishment prescribed is not less than three years and not exceeding seven years, in
addition to fine. Section 15 confers upon the Government the power to make rules to
carry to carry the purposes of the enactment.
118. The 1983 Act was amended in the year 1992 by inserting Section 3-A, which
Section reads as follows:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, but subject to such rules as
may be ma in this behalf and the Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions
(Regulation of Admission Order 1974, it shall be lawful for the management of
any un-aided private Engineering College, Medical College, Dental College and
such other class of un-aided education institutions as may be notified by the
Government in this behalf to admit students into such colleges or educational
institutions to the extent of the half of the total number of seats from among
those who have qualified in the common entrance test or in the qualifying
examination, as the case may be, referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section-3
irrespective of the ranking assigned to them in such test or examination and
nothing contained in Section 5 shall apply to such admission.
It is necessary to notice what precisely this Section provides for. It starts with a
nonobstante clause - "Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, but subject to
such rules as may be made in this behalf and the Andhra Pradesh Educational
Institutions (Regulation of Admission) Order 1974 (Presidential order issued under
Article 371-D of the Constitution)"; that it shall be lawful for the management of any
un-aided private Engineering I Medical College, Dental College and such other class of
un-aided education institution as may be notified by the Government in this behalf to
admit students into such Colleges or educational institutions to the extent of 50 per cent
of the seats from among those in the entrance test or the qualifying examination, as the
case may be the section says leather curiously - that the educational institution shall be
entitled to admit them irrespective of the ranking assigned to them in the entrance test
or qualifying examination and at nothing contained in Section 5 shall apply to such
admission. In short it means that it is open to a private medical/engineering college to
admit students of its choice to the extent of 50 per cent - so long as they have qualified
in the common entrance test - without regard ranking and/or merit. The dispensing with
of the Section 5 for the above purpose is a indication that it is open to the institution to
collect such capitation fee as it can from such Of course, the 'tuition fee' shall be the
same as is prescribed by the Government under Section 7. Section 3-A came into force on 15.
4.1992. No Rules have been made by the
Government under the Section so far.
119. On 25.
5.1992, the Government issued a notification inviting applications for
permission establish medical, Dental and Engineering Colleges. The last date prescribed
for receipt of applications was 8.6.1992. The applications for Medical Colleges had to
deposit within the flute a sum of rupees one crore in cash, furnish bank guarantee for
another one crore in furnish bank guarantee for another one crore and produce evidence
of financial viability extent of four crores. A committee was appointed to inspect the
land and other facilities by the applicants. The Committee formulated its guidelines on
28.6.1992 and flitted its report on 21.7.1992 recommending as many as 12 Medical
Colleges and 8 Dental feges. The then Chief Minister approved the same on 27.7.1992
and a G.O.; was issued on same day granting permission. A number of Writ Petitions
were immediately filed in the Court challenging the said grant as well as Section 3-A.
120. There are a number of private engineering colleges in the State. Until the current
academic (1992-1993), all the seats in these colleges were filled in by the convener of
the common entrance examination. The management had no discretion or choice in the
matter of admission students. They were, however, permitted to charge a particular fees
which was relatively than the fees charged in the Government Engineering Colleges.
Nothing more. But Section 3-A was introduced in the 1983 Act on 15. 4.1992, these private engineering colleges took the stand that they are entitled to admit students to
the extent of 50 per cent of eats according to their choice, irrespective of merit, so long
as they have qualified in the entrance test. It is obvious that such a stand meant
collection of capitation fee as much as they could. There was an uproar among the
student and teaching community against such admissions. Even the Government could
not ignore the said protest and intimated the private engineering colleges on 26.7.1992
not to make any admissions till the Rules are made under Section 3-A. The engineering
colleges, however, took the stand that they have already made the admissions
according to their choice to the extent of 50 per cent. Indeed all this w; facilitated by
the fact that convenor allotted students to these engineering colleges only to extent of
50 per cent of their respective capacity instead of 100% as usual thereby sending a
explicit signal that the colleges were free to fill up the rest on their own. Be that as it
may, the admissions led to the filing of a batch of write petitions in the Andhra Pradesh
High Court. Following Mohini Jain and also on certain other grounds, a Full Bench of the
Andhra Pradesh High Court allowed the Write Petitions, it declared Section 3-A un-
Constitutional. It also declared that the admissions made by the private Engineering
Colleges to the extent of 51 cent at their own choice was illegal. The Court further
declared that the grant of permission to 12 Medical and 8 Dental Colleges was equally
invalid. It is against the said decision that the State of Andhra Pradesh, certain
educational institutions and the students admitted at the choice of the managements
have come forward with a number of Special leave petitions.
121. Leave is granted in all the Special leave petitions preferred against the Full Bench
decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court dated 18th September, 1992 in Writ Petition
No. 8248 of 1992 and batch. Besides the appeals, there are a few writ petitions from
this State questioning the correctness of the dicta in Mohini Jain.
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 122. The Maharashtra Legislature enacted the Maharashtra Educational Institutions
(Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1987. (being Maharashtra Act No. VI of 1988) to
prohibit collection of capitation fee for admission of students to, and their promotion to
a higher standard or class in, the educational institutions in the State of maharashtra
and to provide for matters connected therewith. The Preamble to the Act declaims :
WHEREAS the practice of collecting capitation fee for admitting students into
educational; institutions and at the time of promoting students to a higher
standard or class at various stages of education is on the increase in the State;
AND WHEREAS this undesirable practice has been contributing to large scale
commercialisation of education which is not conducive to the maintenance of
educational standards;
AND WHEREAS the National Policy on Education 1986 envisages that the
commercialisation of technical and professional education should be curbed and
that steps should be taken to prevent the establishment of institutions set up to
commercialize education;
AND WHEREAS with a view to effectively curb this evil practice, it is expedient
in the public interest to prohibit collection of capitation fee for admission of
students to, and their promotion to a higher standard or class in, the
educational institutions in the State of Maharashtra and to provide for matters
connected therewith; it is hereby enacted in the Thirty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows : 123. Section 2 defines certain expressions occurring in the Act. Clause (a) defines
capitation fee to mean "any amount, by whatever name called, whether in cash or kind,
paid or collected, directly or indirectly, in excess of the prescribed or, as the case may
be, approved, rates of fees regulated under Section 4". Sub-section (1) of Section 3 prohibits the collection of capitation fee either for admission of a student or for his
promotion to higher class. Sub-section (2), however, permits the management of an
educational institution to collect and accept donations from benevolent persons,
organisations, trusts and other associations but says that no seats shall be reserved in
consideration thereof. The moneys so received shall have to be deposited and dealt with
in the prescribed manner. Sub-section (3) provides that if in any case it is found that
any private educational institution has contravened any provisions of the Act or the
Rules made there under, it shall be directed to refund the to the person from whom it
was collected. Section 4 empowers the government to regulate the tuition fee that may
be received or collected by any educational institution for admission to any of study in
such institution. Separate fee shall have to be prescribed for aided institutions' un-aided
institutions. In the case of un-aided institutions, the tuition fee shall be prescribed
having regard to the usual expenditure excluding any expenditure on lands and
buildings or on other item as the State Government may notify. Different scales of
tuition fee can be prescribed for different institutions or different areas or different
courses of study, as the case may [Section 7 provides for punishment which may extend
to three years and fine in case of aviation IV. have of any provisions of Act or Rules.
124. It is stated that the government of Maharashtra had prescribed an uniform fee of
Rs. 6,500/per annum in the case of private un-aided engineering colleges, which was
raised to Rs. 8,500/1991, In 1992, the fees was raised only in the case of outside
students (students outside the Maharashtra State) to Rs. 17,000/-.
It is also stated that the government of Maharashtra has issued a notification directing
that of the seats in any private engineering college shall be filled by nominees of the
Government and the remaining 10 per cent by the management at its discretion. In the
case of medical colleges, the fee prescribed in the case of private un-aided medical
colleges for the current academic year is Rs. 30,000/- for Maharashtra students and Rs.
60,000/- in the case of outside dents. In the case of medical colleges, 20% of the seats
are allowed to be filled by the management at their discretion. Remaining 80% seats are
to be filled by the Government nominees.
125. Mahatma Gandhi Mission, Nanded, the appellant in C.A. No. 3573 of 1992 was
permitted ' the State Government to start an un-aided medical college at Aurangabad. It
is stated that the appellant is a Public Charitable Trust registered under societies
Registration Act, 1860 as well as Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950. The medical college is
affiliated to Marathwada University and also recognised by the Maharashtra medical
council. The total intake capacity is 100 seats each. The permission to start medical
college was accorded to the appellant on no-grant-in-aid sis. The appellant was allowed
to fill 20% of the seats at their discretion from among those students who have
obtained a minimum of 50% of the marks in the aggregate in specified subjects have
passed the qualifying examination in their first attempt. (There is no system of common
entrance test in Maharashtra) Admissions were accordingly made for the current
academic year. soon after the decision of this Court in Mohini Jain, a large number of
students filled a write petition in the High Court of Bombay (Aurangabad Bench)
claiming refund of the fee collected Dm them in excess of the fee prescribed by the
Government for students admitted in government medical colleges for such course. A
Division Bench made an interim order on 27th August, 1992 directing the appellant
institution to furnish a bank guarantee to the extent of 50% of the excess amount
collected by them from the students, i.e., in a sum of Rs. 42 lakhs pending disposal of
the fit petition. It was further directed that pending disposal of the writ petition, the
institution shall not collect any amount in excess, of Rs. 3,000/- from any of the
students. The said interlocutory order is challenged by the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 3572 of 1992. 126.
Writ Petition 855 of 1992 is filed by Jammu and Kashmir Parents Association of
Students questioning the notification issued by the Government of Maharashtra
obligating the outside-Maharashtra students to pay double the tuition fee payable by the
Maharashtra students.
127. Writ Petition 678 of 1992 is preferred by Maharashtra Institute of Technology,
Pune questioning the correctness of Mohini Jain and praying for issuance of a
declaration that the petitioner has a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India to establish and run a self-financing engineering college subject to
compliance with the regulatory requirements of the statute. The petitioner has also
invoked Article 19(1)(c) as conferring upon him a right to establish/form any
association to run an engineering college on self-financing basis.
TAMIL NADU 128. Soon after the decision in Mohini Jain, the Governor of Tamil Nadu promulgated
an ordinance being ordinance No. 10 of 1992 called the Tamil Nadu Educational
Institutions (Prohibition of collection of capitation fee) Ordinance, 1992. The ordinance
has since been substituted by an Act - Tamil Nadu Educational Institutions (Prohibition
of collection of capitation fee) Act, 1992, being Act No. 57 of 1992. The Act is designed
to prohibit the collections in the State of Tamil Nadu and provide for matters relating
thereto. The preamble to the Act recites :
WHEREAS the practice of collecting capital fee for admitting students into
educational institutions is widespread in the State;
AND WHEREAS this undesirable practice, besides contributing a large scale
commercialisation of education, has not been conducive to the maintenance of
educational standards;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to effectively curb this undesirable
practice, in public interest, by prohibiting the collection of capitation fee and to
provide for matters relating thereto;
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the
Forty third Year of the Republic of India as follows : 129. The Act has been given effect from 20th day of August, 1992, the date on which
the ordinance was issued. The expression 'capitation fee' is defined in Clause (a) of
Section 2 to mean "any amount, by whatever name called, paid or collected, directly or
indirectly, in excess of the fee prescribed under Section 4." Section 3 prohibits the
collection of capitation fee by any educational institution or by any person on its behalf.
Section 4 empowers the government to regulate the fee chargeable in educational
institutions. Once such a notification is issued, no institution can charge or collect any
fee over and above the fee prescribed. The Section reads thus: 4. (1) Notwithstanding any contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Government may, by notification, regulate the tuition fee or any other
fee or deposit that may be received or collected by any educational institution
or class or classes of such educational institutions in respect of any or all class
or classes of students:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the
draft of which shall be published in the Tamil Nadu Government
Gazette stating that any objection or suggestion which may be received
by the Government, within such period as may be specified therein,
shall be considered by them.
(2) No educational institution shall receive or collect any fee or accept deposit
in excess of the amount notified under Sub-section (1).
(3) Every educational institution shall issue an official receipt for the fee or
deposit received or collected by it.
Section 5 empowers the Government to regulate the maintenance of accounts by the
educational institutions in such manner as may be prescribed. Similarly, Section 6 empowers the Government to call upon the educational institutions to submit such
returns or statements in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed for
carrying out the purposes of the Act. Section 7 provides for penalties in case of
contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or the rules made there under. The
minimum punishment is three years imprisonment which may extend upto seven years
in addition to fine. Besides penalty, the educational institution is also made liable to
refund excess amount/capitation fee collected to the concerned students/persons.
Section 12 gives an overriding effect to the provisions of the Act over any other law for
the time being in force. Section 14 confers upon the Government the power to make
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. It is not brought to our notice that rules have
been made under the Act as yet. Sri P.R. Seetharaman, learned Counsel for the State of
Tamil Nadu, however, filed a statement "THE PRESENT EMISSION FORMULA IN RESPECT OF SELF-FINANCING PRIVATE MEDICAL ALLEGES AND ENGINEERING COLLEGES IN TAMIL NADU". It is necessary to set out I statement in full. It reads :
The Government of Tamil Nadu has also recently constituted a committee for
examining proposals regarding regulation of fixation of fees in respect of self-
financing colleges of medical and engineering and of Art and Science as well as
unaided courses of private aided colleges. True copy of the order is annexed
hereto. The self-financing Medical Colleges in 'Tamil Nadu are allowed to admit
candidates of their choice upto 60% of the approved intake of the college
adhering to the minimum mark rule prescribed for Government Medical Colleges
in Tamil Nadu are allowed to admit candidates of their choice upto 60% of the
approved intake of the college adhering to the minimum mark rule prescribed
for Government Medical Colleges. The remaining 40% of the seats are allowed
by the Director of Medical Education every year and this is filled from among
the approved list of candidates selected for admission to Government and
Private Medical Colleges. The self-financing private Engineering Colleges are
allowed to admit candidates of their choice upto 50% of the approved intake of
the college under Management quota. The remaining 50% of the seats are
allowed by the Director of Technical Education every year from among the
approved list of candidates selected for admission to Government and aided
colleges. True copies of the orders passed by the Government of Tamil Nadu
are annexed hereto. DATED AT DELHI THIS 10TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 1992. COUNCIL FOR TAMIL NADU."
130. Sri Seetharaman further stated that the Government will insist that from the
students admitted against 40% government seats, only the fee collected in government
medical colleges will be allowed to be collected. He also brought to our notice that the
government has constituted committee to go into and frame rules regulating the fee
structure in self-financing medical, engineering and other colleges, (vide G.O.M.S 1172
Education (JI) Deptt. dated 30.11.1992.).
130A. Writ Petition 701 of 1992 is filed by the Annamalai University and its Pro-
Chancellor, v. M.A.M. Ramaswamy questioning the provisions of the above Act and the
correctness of the principles enunciated in Mohini Jain. A Writ of mandamus is sought
by this institution directed the respondents (State of Tamil Nadu, Union of India and the
University Grants Commission) forbear from in any manner interfering with the right of
the petitioner to collect capitation fees whatever nomenclature the said fee or payment
may be described from the students seeking admission into various degree courses in
the colleges under the control of the petitioner University cover a reasonable return on
the capital investment and meet the recurring expenditure every year running the course
in the colleges including for running Rajah Sir Muthiah Medical college and Hospital
from the various students who seek admission and who have the requisite merit to be
admitted and who are ready and willing to pay such amount." Yet another mandamus is
sought greeting the respondents to ensure that the petitioners are not compelled to
charge merely the rates of fees as charged by colleges run by the State government
from the students who have the requisite merit for admission irrespective of their
capacity to contribute for the maintenance and running of the college as any by way of
payment of fees by whatever nomenclature it may be called.
131. The petitioners have come forward with the following case: Annamalai University
is an autonomous residential unitary university established and incorporated under the
Annamalai University Act, 1928 enacted by the then Madras Legislature. It has 45
faculties including Engineering and Technology and Medicine. So far as the medical
college is concerned, the annual intake in 125. Against this strength of 125, the
petitioner admits 50 students belonging Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
backward classes. Only a nominal fee is collected from them. From the remaining 75
students, a sum of Rs. 4 lakhs is collected by way of fees. This sum of RS. 4 lakhs is
hardly sufficient to meet the cost of medical education. Unless this minimum fee of Rs.
4 lakhs is collected from at least 75 students, it is not possible for the petitioner to run
the medical college which is attached to a hospital. While so, the Governor of Tamil
Nadu has issue the aforesaid ordinance prohibiting the capitation fee. This ordinance
has evidently been issued pursuant to the decision of this Court in Mohini Jain. If the
petitioner is compelled to collect only that fee which is charged by the Government in
Government Medical Colleges, it would impossible to run the medical college. It has to
close down. The impugned ordinance (by the date of filing of the writ petition the Act
replacing the ordinance had not yet come into force) is violative of the fundamental
right of the petitioners to establish and administer a medical college by collecting
appropriate amounts from the students who are ready and willing to pay the same for
their admission into the medical college, says the petitioner. PART - II Question No.]: "Whether the Constitution of India guarantees a fundamental right WO
education to its citizens ?
132. Right to education is not stated expressly as a fundamental right in Part III. This
court has, however, not followed the rule that unless a right is expressly stated as a
fundamental right, it cannot be treated as one. Freedom of Press is not expressly
mentioned in Part-Ill, yet it has been' read into and inferred from the freedom of speech
and expression - (Express Newspapers v. Union of India MANU/SC/0157/1958 :
(1961)ILLJ339SC . More particularly, from Article 21 has sprung up a whole lot of
human rights jurisprudence viz., right to legal aid and speedy trial (Hussain Ara Khatoon-MANU/SC/0121/1979 : 1979CriLJ1045 to A.R. Antulay- 1992 (1) S.C.R. 225
the right to means of livelihood (Olga Tellis - 1985 Suppl. (2) S.C.R. 51 , right to dignity
and privacy (Kharak Singh MANU/SC/0085/1962 : 1963CriLJ329 , right to health
(Vincent v. Union of India- : [1987]2SCR468 , right to pollution-free environment (M.C.
Mehta v. Union of India- MANU/SC/0396/1987 : [1988]1SCR279 ) and so on. Let us
elaborate.
132A. In Express Newspapers v. Union of India MANU/SC/0157/1958 :
(1961)ILLJ339SC it has been held:
The freedom of speech comprehends the freedom of press and the freedom of
speech and press are fundamental and personal rights of the citizens.
133. Article 21 declares that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except according to the procedure established by law. It is true that the Article is
worded in negative terms but is now well-settled that Article 21 has both a negative and
an affirmative dimension. As far back as 1962, a Constitution Bench (comprising of six
learned Judges) in Kharak Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
MANU/SC/0085/1962 : 1963CriLJ329 decided on 18th December, 1962 considered the
content of the expression "personal liberty" occurring in Article 21. Rajagopala
Ayyangar, J. speaking for the majority, observed:
We shall now proceed with the examination of the width, scope and content of
the expression ; "personal liberty " in Article 21. We feel unable to hold that the
term was intended to bear only this narrow interpretation but on the other hand
consider that "personal liberty" is used in the Article as a compendious term to
include within itself all the varieties of rights which go to make up the
"personal liberties" of man other than those deal with in the several clauses of
Article 19(1). In other words, while Article 19(1). In other words, while Article
19(1) deals with particular species or attributes of that freedom, "personal
liberty" in Article 21 takes in and comprises the residue.
The learned Judge quoted the dissenting opinion of Field, J. (one of those dissenting
opinions which have out-lived the majority pronouncements) in Munn v. Illinois 1877 (94) U.S. 113
attributing a broader meaning to the word "life" in the fifth and
fourteenth amendments to the U.S. Constitution, which correspond inter alia to Article
21 of our Constitution. The learned Judge held that the word "personal liberty' would
include the privacy and sanctity of a man's home as well as the dignity of the individual.
The minority judges, however, placed a more expansive interpretation on Article 21.
They lid:
No doubt the expression 'personal liberty' is a comprehensive one and the right
to move freely is an attribute of personal liberty. It is said that the freedom to
move freely is carved out of personal liberty and, therefore, the expression
"personal liberty' in Article 21 excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a
correct approach. Both are independent fundamental rights, though there is
overlapping. There is not question of one being carved out of another. The
fundamental right of life and personal liberty has many attributes and some of
them are found in Article 19. If a person's fundamental right under Article 21 is
infringed, the state can rely upon a law to sustain the action, that cannot be a
complete answer unless the said law satisfies the test laid down in Article 19(2)
so far as the attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned.
134. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India 1978 S.C. 597 Bhagwati, J. held that the
judgment in R.C. Cooper v. Union of India 1970 S.C. 564 has the effect of over ruling
the majority opinion and of approving the minority opinion in Kharak Singh.
135. In Boiling v. Sharpe 98 L Ed. 884 Warren, C.J. speaking for the U.S. Supreme
Court observed "although the court has not assumed to define "liberty" with any great
precision, that term is not confined to mere freedom from bodily restraint. Liberty under
law extends to the pull range of conduct which the individual is free to pursue, and it
cannot be restricted except for a proper governmental objective." Having said so, the
learned Judge proceeded to observe ["segregation in public education is not reasonably
related to any proper governmental objective, [and thus it imposes on Negro children of
the District of Columbia a burden that constitutes an arbitrary deprivation of their liberty
in violation of the Due Process clause."
136. The word "life" occurring in Article 21 too has received a broad and expansive
interpretation, while it is not necessary to refer to all of them, reference must be made
to the |decision in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation MANU/SC/0039/1985 :
1985 Supp. (2) S.C.R. 51. Chandra-chud, C.J. speaking for a Constitution Bench of this
Court observed:
The sweep of the right to life conferred by Article 21 is wide and far reaching. It
does not mean merely that life cannot be extinguished or taken away as, for
example, by the imposition and execution of the death sentence, except
according to procedure established by law. That is but one aspect of the right to
life. An equally important facet of that right is the right to livelihood because,
no person can live without the means of living, that is, the means of livelihood.
If the right to livelihood is not treated as a part of the constitutional right to
life, the easiest way of depriving a person his right to life would be to deprive
him of his means of livelihood to the point of abrogation. Such deprivation
would not only denude the life of its effective content and meaningfulness but it
would make life impossible to live. And yet, such deprivation would not have to
be in accordance with the procedure established by law, if the right to
livelihood is not regarded as a part of the right to life. That, which alone makes
it possible to live, leave aside what makes life viable, must be deemed to be an
integral component of the right to life. Deprive a person of his right to
livelihood and you shall have deprived him of his life.... Article 39(a) of the
Constitution, which is a Directive Principle of State Policy, provides that the
State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the citizens,
men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood.
Article 41, which is another Directive Principle provides, inter alia, that the
State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make
effective provision for securing the right to work in cases of unemployment and
of undeserved want. Article 37 provides that the Directive Principles, though not
enforceable by any court, are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of
the country. The Principles contained in Articles 39(a) and 41 must be regarded
as equally fundamental in the understanding and interpretation of the meaning
and content of fundamental rights. If there is an obligation upon the State to
secure to the citizens an adequate means of livelihood and the right to work, it
would be sheer pedantry to exclude the right to livelihood from the content of
the right to life.
137. In Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India MANU/SC/0051/1983 : [1984]2SCR67
Bhagwati, J. while affirming the proposition that Article 21 must be construed in the
light of the Directive Principles of the State Policy observed thus:
This right to live with human dignity enshrined in Article 21 derives its life
breath from the Directive Principles of State Policy and particularly Clauses (e)
and (f) of Article 39 and Articles 41 and 42 and at the least, therefore, it must
include protection of the health and strength of workers men and women, and
of the tender age of children against abuse, opportunities and facilities of
children to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and
dignity, educational facilities, just and humane conditions of work and
maternity relief. These are the minimum requirements which must exist in order
to enable a person to live with human dignity.... In D.S. Nakara v. Union of India MANU/SC/0392/1983 : [1985]154ITR64(SC) , a Constitution Bench explained the significance of the addition of the expression
"Socialist" in the preamble of our Constitution in the following words:
During the formative years...socialism aims at providing all opportunities for
pursuing the educational activity....
There will be equitable distribution of national cake....
In Vincent v. Union of India
: [1987]2SCR468 , it was held by a Division Bench of this
Court that:
In a welfare State, therefore, it is the obligation of the State to ensure the
creation and the sustaining of conditions congenial to good health.... In a series
of pronouncements, during the recent years, this Court has culled out from the
provisions of Part-IV of the Constitution, the several obligations of the State
and called upon it to effectuate them in order that the resultant pictured by the
Constitution fathers may become a reality.
In A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Naik 1992 (1) S.C.R. 225 , a Constitution Bench of this Court
held that Article 21 creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily and that the said
right encompasses all the stages of a criminal case. It was held that the violation of this
right of the accused may entail the very quashing of the charges.
Interplay of Parts III and IV: 138. This Court has also been consistently adopting the approach that the fundamental
rights and directive principles are supplementary and complementary to each other and
that the provisions in Part-Ill should be interpreted having regard to the Preamble and
the directive principles of the State policy. The initial hesitation to recognise the
profound significance of part ' has been given up long ago. We may explain.
While moving for consideration the interim report on fundamental rights, Sardar
Vallabhai Patel described both the rights mentioned in Parts III and IV as 'fundamental
rights'-one justiciable and other nonjusticiable. In his supplemental report, he stated:
There were two parts of the report; one contains fundamental rights which were
justiciable and the other part of the report refers to fundamental rights which
were not justifiable but were directives.
This statement indicates the significance attached to directive principles by the founding
fathers. It is true that in The State of Madras v. Champakam Dorairajan
MANU/SC/0029/1958 : [1959]1SCR995 , fundamental rights were held permanent vis-
a-vis Directive Principles but since then there has been a perceptible shift in this Court's
approach to the inter-play of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles.
139. As far back as in 1958, in the Kerala Education Bill a Special Bench of this Court
speaking through S.R. Das, C.J., while affirming the primacy of Fundamental Rights,
qualified the same with the following observations:
Nevertheless, in determining the scope and ambit of the fundamental rights
relied upon by or on behalf of any person or body, the court may not entirely
ignore these directive principles of State policy laid down in Part-IV of the
Constitution but should adopt the principle of harmonious construction and
should attempt to give effect to both as much as possible.
This is also the view taken in Hanif v. State of Bihar 1959 S.C.R. 629 at 655.
In Keshavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala 1973 Suppl. 521 more than one learned
Judge adverted to this aspect. In the words of Hegde and Mukherjee, JJ.:
The Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles constitute the conscience' of
the Constitution.... To ignore Part IV is to ignore the sustenance provided for in
the Constitution, the hopes held out to the nation and the very ideals on which
our Constitution is built.... There is no anti-thesis between the Fundamental
Rules and the Directive Principles.... One Supplements the other
Shelat and Grover, JJ. in their judgment observed:
Both Parts III and IV have to be balanced and harmonised...then alone the
dignity of the individual can be achieved.... They (Fundamental Rights and
Directive Principles) were meant to supplement each other.
Mathew, J. while adopting the same approach remarked:
The object of the people in establishing the Constitution was to promote
justice, social and economic liberty and equality. The modus operandi to
achieve these objectives is set out in Parts III and IV of the Constitution. Both
Parts III and IV enumerate certain moral rights. Each of these parts represents
in the main the statements in one sense of certain aspirations whose fulfillment
was regarded as essential to the kind of society which the Constitution makers
wanted to build. Many of the articles, whether in Part III or Part IV, represent
moral rights which they have recognised as inherent in every human being in
his country. The task of protecting and realising these rights is imposed upon
all the organs of the State, namely, legislative, executive and judicial. What
then is the importance to be attached to the fact that the provisions of Part III
are enforceable in a Court and the provisions in Part IV are not? Is it that the
rights reflected in the provisions of Part III are somehow superior to the moral
claims and aspirations reflected in the provisions of Part IV? I think not. Free
and compulsory education under Article 45 is certainly as important as freedom
of religion under Article 25. Freedom from starvation is as important as right to
life. Nor are the provisions in Part III absolute in the sense that the rights
represented by them can always be given full implementation.
Y.V. Chandrachud, J. (as he then was) put the same idea in the following words:
As I look at the provisions of Parts III and IV, I feel no doubt, that the basic
object of conferring freedoms on individuals is the ultimate achievement of the
ideals set out in Part-IV. May I say that the directive principles of State policy
should not be permitted to become "a mere rope of sand.' If the State fails to
create conditions in which the fundamental freedoms can be enjoyed by all, the
freedoms can be enjoyed by all, the freedom of the few will be at the mercy of
the many and then all freedoms will vanish.
140. In State of Karnataka v. Ranganatha Reddy, Krishna Iyer, J. stated:
Our thesis is that the dialectics of social justice should not be missed if the
synthesis of Part III and Part IV is to influence State action and Court
pronouncements. In U.P.S.C. Board v. Harishankar MANU/SC/0500/1978 : A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 65 it was observed: "Addressed to courts, what the injunction (Article 37) means is that while
courts are not free to direct the making of legislation, courts are bound to evolve, affirm
and adopt principle of interpretation which will further and not hinder the goals set out
in the Directive Principles of State Policy. This command of the Constitution must be
ever present in the minds of the Judges while interpreting statutes which concern
themselves directly or indirectly with matters set out in the Directive Principles of State
Policy." This is on the view that the "State' in Article 36 read with Article 12 includes the
judiciary as well. In Minerva Mills v. Union of India MANU/SC/0075/1980 : [1981]1SCR206 , Chandrachud. C.J. quoted with approval the similiar of Granvlle Austin that Parts III and
IV are like two wheels of a chariot and observed that "to give absolute primacy to one
over the other is to disturb the harmony of the Constitution." The learned Chief Justice
observed further:
Those rights (Fundamental Rights) are not an end in themselves but are the
means to an end.
The end is specified in Part-IV.
141. It is thus well established by the decisions of this Court that the provisions of
Parts III and IV are supplementary and complementary to each other and that
Fundamental Rights are but a means to achieve the goal indicated in Part-IV. It is also
held that the fundamental Rights must be construed in the light of the Directive
Principles. It is from the above stand-point that Question No. 1 has to be approached. ARTICLE 21 AND RIGHT TO EDUCATION: 142.
In Bandhua Mukti Morcha this Court held that the right to life guaranteed by
Article 21 does take in "educational facilities". (The relevant portion has been quoted
herein before). Having regard to the fundamental significance of education to the life of,
an individual and the nation, and adopting the reasoning and logic adopted in the
earlier decisions of this Court referred to herein before, we hold, agreeing with the
statement in Bandhua Mukti Morcha, that right to education is implicit in and flows from
the right to life guaranteed by Article 21. That the right to education has been treated as
one of transcendental importance in the life of an individual has been recognised not
only in this country since thousands of years, but all over the world. In Mohini Jain, the
importance of education has been duly and rightly stressed. The relevant observations
have already set out in para 7 herein before. In particular, we agree with the
observation that without education being provided to the citizens of this country, the
objectives set forth in the Preamble he Constitution cannot be achieved. The
Constitution would fail.
We do not think that the importance of education could have been better emphasised
than in the above words.
The importance of education was emphasised in the "Neethishatakam' by Bhartruhari
(First Century in the following words:
Translation:
Education is the special manifestation of man;
Education is the treasure which can be preserved without the fear of loss;
Education secures material pleasure, happiness and fame;
Education is the teacher of the teacher;
Education is God incarnate;
Education secures honour at the hands of the State, not money.
A man without education is equal to animal.
The fact that right to education occurs in as many as three Articles in Part-IV viz.,
Articles 1, 45 and 46 shows the importance attached to it by the founding fathers. Even
some of the Articles in Part-Ill viz., Articles 29 and 30 speak of education.
143. In Brown v. Board of Education 98 L Ed. 873 , Earl Warren, C.J., speaking for the
U.S. Supreme Court emphasised the right to education in the following words :
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local
governments.... It is required in the performance of our most basic
responsibilities, even service the armed forces. It is the very foundation of good
citizenship. Today it is the principal instrument in awakening the child to
cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping
him at adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubtful any
child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the
opportunity of an education.
In Wisconsin v. Yoder 32 L.Ed. 2d. 15 , the court recognised that:
Providing public schools ranks at the very apex of the function of a State.
The said fact has also been affirmed by eminent educationists of modern India like Dr.
Dhakrishnan, J.P. Naik, Dr. Kothari and Ors.
144. It is argued by some of the counsel for the petitioners that Article 21 is negative
in character and that it merely declares that no person shall be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. Since the State is
no depriving the respondents- students of their right to education, Article 21 is not
attracted, it is submitted. If and when the State makes law taking away the right to
education, would Article 21 be attracted, according to them. his argument, in our
opinion, is really born of confusion; at any rate, it is designed to confuse. The first
question is whether the right to life guaranteed by Article 21 does take in the right)
education or not. It is then that the second question arises whether the State is taking
away that right. The mere fact that the State is not taking away the right as at present
does not mean that right of to education is not included within the right to life. The
content of the right is not determined by perception of threat. The content of right to
life is not be to determined on the basis of existence or absence of threat of
deprivation. The effect of holding that right to education is implicit in the Plight to life is
that the State cannot deprive the citizen of his right to education except in accordance
with the procedure prescribed by law.
145. In the above state of law, it would not be correct to contend that Mohini Jain was
wrong in so far as it declared that "the right to education flows directly from right to
life". But the question is what is the content of this right? How much and what level of
education is necessary to ma the life meaningful? Does it mean that every citizen of this
country can call upon the State to provide him education of his choice? In other words,
whether the citizens of this country can demand that the State provide adequate number
of medical colleges, engineering colleges and other educational institutions to satisfy all
their educational needs? Mohini Jain seems to say, yes With respect, we cannot agree
with such a broad proposition. The right to education which, implicit in the right to life
and personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 must be construed in the light of the
directive principles in Part IV of the Constitution. So far as the right to education
concerned, there are several articles in Part IV which expressly speak of it. Article 41
says that the "State shall within the limits of Us economic capacity and development,
make effective provision for securing the right to work to education and to public
assistance in cases of unemployment old age, sickness and disablement, and in other
cases of undeserved want." Article 45 says that "the State shall endeavor to provide,
within a period of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution, for free and
compulsory education for all children until they complete the age fourteen years."
Article 46 commands that "the State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice
and all forms of exploitation. Education means knowledge and knowledge itself is
power. As right observed by John Adams, the preservation of means of knowledge
among the lowest ranks is more importance to the public than all "property of all the
rich men in the country" (Dissertation on canon and feudal law, 1765). It is this concern
which seems to underlie Article 46. It is the tyrants and bad rulers who are afraid of
spread of education and knowledge among the deprived classes. Witness Hitler railing
against universal education. He said: "Universal education is the most corroding and
disintegrating poison that liberalism has ever invented for its own destruction."1'
(Rauschning, The voice of destruction; Hitler speaks). A true democracy is one where
education! is universal, where people understand what is good for them and the nation
and know how to govern themselves. The three Articles 45, 46 and 41 are designed to
achieve the said goal among] others. It is in the light of these articles that the content
and parameters of the right to education: have to be determined. Right to education,
understood in the context of Articles 45 and 41 means:(a) every child/citizen of this
country has a right to free education until he completes the age of fourteen years and
(b) after a child/citizen completes the age of 14 years, his right education is
circumscribed by the limits of the economic capacity of the State and its developments.
We may deal with both these limbs separately.
Right to free education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years
(45A). It is noteworthy that among the several articles in part IV, only Article 45 speaks
of a time-limit; no other article does Has it no significance? Is it a mere pious wish,
even after 44 years of the Constitution? Can the State flout the said direction even after
44 years on the ground that the article merely calls upon it to "endeavor to provide" the
same and on the further ground that the said article is not enforceable by virtue of the
declaration in Article 37. Does not the passage of 44 years - more than four times the
period stipulated in Article 45 - convert the obligation created by the article into an
enforceable right? In this context, we feel constrained to say that allocation of available
funds to different sectors of education in India discloses an inversion of priorities gated
by the Constitution. The Constitution contemplated a crash programme being under
taken by the State to achieve the goal set out in Article 45. It is relevant to notice that
Article 45 pot speak of the "limits of its economic capacity, and development" as does
Article 41, which inter alia speaks of right to education. What has actually happened is -
more money is spent and attention is directed to higher education than to - and at the
cost of- primary education. (By primary education, we mean the education, which a
normal child receives by the time he completes 14 years of age). Neglected more so are
the rural sectors, and the weaker sections of the society to in Article 46. We clarify, we
are not seeking to lay down the priorities for the government - we are only emphasising
the constitutional policy as disclosed by Articles 45, 46 and, 41 Surely the wisdom of
these constitutional provisions is beyond question. This inversion of priorities has been
commented upon adversely by both the educationists and economists,
Gunnar Myrdal, the noted economist and sociologist, a recognised authority on South
Asia, in his book "Asian Drama" (abridged Edition - published in 1972) makes these
perceptive observations at page 335:
But there is another and more valid criticism to make. Although the declared
purpose was to give priority to the increase of elementary schooling in order to
raise the rate of literacy in the population, what has actually happened is that
secondary schooling has been rising much faster and tertiary schooling has
increased still more rapidly. There is a fairly general tendency for planned
targets of increased primary schooling not to be reached, whereas targets are
overreached, sometimes substantially, as regards increases in secondary and,
particularly, tertiary schooling. This has all happened in spite of the fact that
secondary schooling seems to be three to five times more expensive than
primary schooling, and schooling at the tertiary level five to seven times more
expensive than at the secondary level.
What we see functioning here is the distortion of development from planned
targets under the influence of the pressure from parents and pupils in the upper
strata who everywhere are politically powerful. Even more remarkable is the
fact that this tendency to distortion from the point of view of the planning
objectives is more accentuated in the poorest countries, Pakistan, India, Burma
and Indonesia, which started out with far fewer children in primary schools and
which should therefore have the strongest reasons to carry out the programme
of giving primary schooling the highest priority. It is generally the poorest
countries that are spending least, even relatively, on primary education, and
that are permitting the largest distortions from the planned targets in favour of
secondary and tertiary education.
In his other book "Challenge of World Poverty" (published in 1970) he discusses
Elaborately - in chapter 6 'Education' - the reasons for and the consequences of neglect
of basic Education in this country. He quotes J.P. Naik, (the renowned educationist,
whose Report of the Education Commission, 1966 is still considered to be the most
authoritative study of education scene in India) as saying "Educational development...is
benefitting the "haves" more than the have nots". This is a negation of social justice
and "planning' proper" - and our Constitution speaks repeatedly of social justice
(Preamble and Article 38(1). As late as 1985, the Ministry of Education had this to say
in para 3.74 of its publication "Challenge of Education - a policy perspective". It is
stated there:
3.74. Considering the constitutional imperative regarding the universalisation of
elementary education it was to be expected that the share of this sector would
be protected from attribution. Facts, however, point in the opposite direction.
From a share of 56 per cent in the First Plan, it declined to 35 per cent in the
Second Plan, to 34 Per cent in the Third Plan, to 30 per cent in the Fourth Plan.
It started going up again only in the Fifth Plan, when it was at the levels 32 per
cent, increasing in Sixth Plan to 36 per cent, still 20 per cent below the First
Plan level. On the other hand, between the First and the Sixth Five Year Plans,
the share of university education went up from 9 per cent to 16 per cent.
Be that as it may, We must say that at least now the State should honour the command
of Article 45. It must be made a reality - at least now. Indeed, the 'National Education
Policy - 1986 says that the promise of Article 45 will be redeemed before the end of this
century. Be that as it may, we hold that a child (citizen) has a fundamental right to free
education upto the age of 14 years.
146. This does not however mean that this obligation can be performed only through
the State schools. It can also be done by permitting, recognising and aiding voluntary
non-governmental organisations, who are prepared to impart free education to children.
This does not also mean that unaided private schools cannot continue. They can,
indeed, they too have a role to play. They me the demand of that segment of population
who may not wish to have their children educated it State-run schools. They have
necessarily to charge fees from the students. In this judgmental however, we do not
wish to say anything about such schools or for that matter other private education
institutions except 'professional colleges'. This discussion is really necessitated on|
account of the principles enunciated in Mohini Jain and the challenge mounted against
those principles in these writ petitions.
147. At this juncture, it would be appropriate to refer to the additional affidavit filed by
the Union of India. In this affidavit, the present state of primary and upper primary
education is set out. (Primary stage means Classes I to v. Upper primary stage means
classes VI to VIII). After setting out the particulars of number of schools and enrollment
therein, it is stated in para 3 that if "this increase provided Indian Education System
with one of the largest systems in the world, providing accessibility within 1 Km.
walking distance of Primary schools to 8.26 lakhs habitations containing about 94% of
the country's population. Growth in enrollment in the decade of 80s showed an
acceleration that has now brought enrollment rates close of 100% at primary stage."
Again in para 4, under the sub-heading "Free education", the following statement
occurs:
4. In the endeavor to increase enrollment and achieve the target of UEE, all
State Governments have abolished tuition fees in Government Schools run by
local bodies and private aided institutions is mostly free in these States;
however, in private unaided schools which constitute 3.7% of the total
elementary schools in the country, some fee is charge. Thus, overall, it may be
said that education upto elementary level in practically all schools is free. 1
Other costs of education, such as text books, uniforms, schools bags, transport
etc. are not borne by States except in a very few cases by way of incentives to
children of indigent families or those belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribes categories. The reason why the State Government are unable to bear this
additional expenditure is that 96% of expenditure only elementary education
goes in meeting the salaries of teaching and non-teaching staff.
Para 5 of the affidavit deals with "compulsory education". It reads as follows: "5.14
States and 4 Union Territories have enacted legislation to make educational compulsory
but the socio economic compulsions that keep the children away from schools have
restrained them from prescribing the rules and regulations whereby those provisions
can be endorsed."
The affidavit also mentions the steps taken by Central and State governments in
pursuance of National Education Policy including "Operation Blackboard" and its
contribution to the increase in primary education. It was indeed gratifying to note these
facts, though much more remains to be done to raise the quality of instruction.
Before proceeding further, we think it right to say this: We are aware that "Education is
Second highest sector of budgeted expenditure after the defence. A little more than
three per cent of the Gross National Product is spent in education", as pointed out in
para 2.31 of Challenge of Education'. But this very publication says that "in comparison
to many countries, India spends much less on education in terms of the proportion of
Gross National Product" - and further "in spite of the fact that educational expenditure
continues to be the highest item of expenditure next only to Defence the resource gap
for educational needs is one of the major problems. Most of the current expenditure is
only in the form of salary payment. It hardly needs to be stated that additional capital
expenditure would greatly augment teacher productivity because in the absence of
expenditure on her heads even the utilisation of staff remains low." We do realise that
ultimately it is a question of resources and resources-wise this country is not in a happy
position. All we are saying is that while allocating the available resources, due regard
should be had to the wise words of Founding Fathers in Articles 45 and 46. Not that we
are not aware of the importance and significance of higher education. What may
perhaps be required is a proper balancing of the various sectors of education.
Right to education after the child/citizen completes the age of 14 years.
148. The right to education further means that a citizen has a right to call upon the
State to provide educational facilities to him within the limits of its economic capacity
and development. By saying so, we are not transferring Article 41 from part IV to Part
III - we are merely relying on Article 41 to illustrate the content of the right to
education flowing from Article 21. We cannot believe that any State would say that it
need not provide education to its people even within limits of its economic capacity and
development. It goes without saying that the limits of economic capacity are, ordinarily
speaking, matters within the subjective satisfaction of the State.
149. In the light of the above enunciation, the apprehension expressed by the counsel
for the petitioners that by reading the right to education into Article 21, this Court
would be enabling each lid every citizen of this country to approach the courts to
compel the State to provide him such application as he chooses must be held to be
unfounded. The right to free education is available only to children until they complete
the age of 14 years. Thereafter, the obligation of the State to provide education is
subject to the limits of its economic capacity and development. Indeed, we are not
stating anything new. This aspect has already been emphasised by this Court in Francis
C. Mullin Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi MANU/SC/0517/1981 : 1981CriLJ306 .
While elaborating the scope of right guaranteed under Article 21, this Court stated:
But the question which arises is whether the right to life is limited only to
protection of limb or faculty or does it go further and embrace something more.
We think that the right to life includes right to live with human dignity and all
that goes along with it viz., the bare necessities of life such as adequate
nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading, writing and expressing
oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about the mixing and commingling with
fellow human beings. Of course, the magnitude and content of the components
of this right would depend upon the extent of the economic development of the
country, but it must in any view of the matter, include a right to the basic
necessities of life and also the right to carry on such functions and activities as
constitute the bare minimum expression of the humanself.
150. We must hasten to add that just because we have relied upon some of the
directive principles of locate the parameters of the right to education implicit in Article
21, it does not follow automatically that each and every obligation referred to in Part IV
gets automatically include within the purview of Article 21. We have held the right to
education to be implicit in the right to life because of its inherent fundamental
importance. As a matter of fact, we have referred to Articles 41, 45 and 46 merely to
determine the parameters of the said right. PART - III Questions No. 2 and 3: 151. It would be convenient to deal with questions No. 2 and 3 together. The
contention urged by the counsel for the petitioners can be broadly summarised in the
following words:
(a) The State has no monopoly in the matter of imparting education. Every
citizen has the fundamental right to establish an educational institution as a
part of the right guaranteed to him by Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. This
right extends even to the establishment of an educational institution with a
profit motive i.e., as a business adventure. The said right, no doubt, is subject
to such reasonable restrictions as may be placed upon it by a law within the
meaning of Clause (6) of Article 19. But for the said restrictions, the right is
absolute.
(b) The vice lies not in the establishment of educational institutions by
individuals and private bodies but in unnecessary State control. The law of
demand and supply...what may be called the 'market forces...must be allowed a
free play. Because there are more number of persons seeking admission than
the existing institutions can provide that the several ills complained of have
developed.
(c) The establishment of an education institution is no different form any other
venture e.g., starting a business or industry. It is immaterial whether the
institution is established with or without profit motive. Indeed, only when there
is profit motive that persons with means would come forward to open more and
more schools and colleges. There are not many persons available today who are
prepared to donate large funds for establishing such institutions by way of
charity or philanthrophy.
(d) Even if it is held, for any reason, that a person has no right to establish an
educational institution as a business venture, he has atleast the right to
establish a self-financing educational institution. Such a institution may also be
described as an institution providing cost-based education. This means that it is
open to a person to collect amounts from willing parties and establish an
institution to educate such persons or their children, as the case may be. Even
in an established institution, the fees that may collected from the students must
be such as not only to defray the expenditure of running the institution but also
for improvement, expansion, diversification and growth. In such institutions,
the quantum of the fees to be charged should be left to the concerned
institutions. The Government should have no say in the matter. So far as the
court is concerned, it is not possible for it, in the very nature of things, to go
into this issue. The needs of each educational institution may be different. The
standard of education imparted and the facilities provided may be different from
institution to institution. May be, the Government or the Court may insist that
as a condition for running such institution, a reasonable number of seats should
be allotted to students purely on merit, who shall be asked to pay only such
fees as is charged in similar Governmental institutions. If this is done-to which
the petitioners have no objection-it will not only meet the needs of education of
those who have the capacity to pay but it will also meet the needs of other
meritorious students who are not able to obtain position in the Governmental
institutions and are also not in a position to pay the fees fully charged such
private institutions. Several facts and figures are furnished to show how in each
State these private educational institutions are providing a large number of
"free seats" to the nominees of the Government. It is pointed out that all these
5 fits would not have had an opportunity of studying the course of their choice
but existence of these private educational institutions.
(e) Mohini Jain's case was not right in saying, in the above situation, that
charging of any amount, by whatever name it is called, over and above the fee
charged by the Government in its own colleges, must be described as capitation
fee. Saying so amounts an impossible condition. It is simply not possible for
the private educational institutions to survive if they are compelled to charge
only that fee as is charged in Governmental institutions. The cost of educating
an engineering or a medical graduate is very high. All that cost is borne by the
State in Governmental colleges but the State does not subsidise the private
educational institutions. The private educational institutions have to find their
own finances and that can come only the students.
(f) Even if the right to establish an educational institution is not trade or
business within meaning of Article 19(1)(g), it is certainly an 'occupation'
within the remaining of the clause . Indeed, the use of the four expressions -
profession, occupation, trade of business in Article 19(1)(g) was meant to
cover the entire field of human activity. In such a situation, it is not necessary
for the petitioners to pinpoint to which particular does their activity relate. It is
enough to say that the petitioners do have the It to establish private
educational institutions - at any rate, self-financing/cost-based private
educational institutions. This right can be restricted only by a law as contented
by Clause (6) of Article 19.
(g) The right to establish and administer an educational institution (by a
member of the majority community, religion or linguistic) arises by necessary
implication from Article 30. The Constitution could not have intended to confine
the said right only to minorities and deprive the majority communities
therefrom. (h) The Government or the University cannot insist or stipulate as a
condition of recognition/affiliation that the private educational institutions
should admit students exclusively on merit. It has been well recognised by this
Court that one who pays for education is also entitled to stipulate the manner in
which he will admit students, there is no reason why such a right should not be
recognised in the case of the private eucational institutions. Moreover, there
may be several kinds of private educational Institutions; they may be
established for achieving certain specified purposes. For example, a medical or
engineering college may be established to cater to the needs of particular
region or a district. Similarly, another educational institution may have fen
established by members of a particular community to educated their own
children. The Gulburga Medical College in the State of Karnataka, it is pointed
out, is established I' meet the educational needs in the field of medicine to the
students belong to Gulburga, Raichur and Bidar districts, formerly included
within the Nizam's dominions and which were included in the State of
Karnataka on the reorganisations of States, Similarly, the Kempe Gowda
Medical College in Karnataka, it is submitted, has been established by members
of Vokkaliga community. Their wishes and objectives have-; to be respected.
There may be yet another institution which may have been established with the
aid of a large donation made by a charitable-minded person e.g., Annamalai
University in Tamil Nadu. If such University stipulates that members of the
founder's family or their nominees will be admitted every year to the extent of a
certain percentage, no fault can be found therewith.
(i) By virtue of mere recognition and/or affiliation these private
educational institutions do not become instrumentalities of the State
within the remaining of Article 12 of the Constitution. The concept of
'State action' cannot be extended to these colleges so as to subject
them to the discipline of Part 111. It may be a different matter if the
institution is in receipt of any aid, partially and wholly, from the State.
In such a situation, the command of Article 29(2) comes into play but
even that does not oblige the institution to admit the students
exclusively on the basis of merit - but only not to deny admission to
anyone on any of the grounds mentioned therein.
152. On the other hand, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the respondents as
also, by the learned Counsel for Indian Medical Council and All India Council for
Technical Education. that: (a) imparting of education has always been recognised in this
country from times immemorial as the religious duty. Both Hinduism and Islam treated
it as such. It has also been recognised a charitable object. But never has it been
recognised as a trade or business. It is a mission, not a trade. Commercialisation of
education has always been looked upon with disfavor in this country. far back as in
1956, the Parliament expressed its intention by enacting the University Grant
Commission Act which specified the prevention of commercialisation of education as
one of the duties of the University Grants Commission. The same intention has been
expressed by several enactments made by the Parliament and State Legislatures since
then.
(b) Imparting of education is the most important function of the State. This
duty may be discharged by the State directly or through the instrumentality of
private educational institutions. But when the State permits a private body or an
individual to perform the said function it is its duty to ensure that no one gets
an admission or an advantage on account of his economic power to the
detriment of a more meritorious candidate.
(c) The very concept of collecting the cost of education - that is what the
concept of cost-based or self-financing educational institutions means-is
morally abhorrent and is opposed to public policy. A capitation fee does not
cease to be a capitation fee just because it is called cost-based education or by
calling the institution concerned as a self-financing institution. These
expressions are but a cover- a mere pretence-for collecting capitation fee. It is
nothing but exploitation. It is an elitist concept basically opposed to the
constitutional philosophy. By allowing such education, two classes will come
into being, the concept suffers from class bias.
(d) If, for any reason, it is held that a citizen or a person has a right to
establish an educational institution, the said right does not carry with it the
right to recognition or the right to affiliation, as the case may be. It has been
repeatedly held by this Court that even a minority educational institution has no
fundamental right to recognition or affiliation. If so, no such right can be
envisaged in the case of majority community or in the case of individuals or
persons. Once this is so, it is open to the State or the University according
recognition or affiliation to impose such conditions as they think appropriate in
the interest of fairness, merit, maintenance of standards of education and on. In
short, it is open to the Government or the University to make it a condition of
recognition/affiliation that the admission of students, in whichever category it
may be, shall be on the basis of merit and merit alone. The institutions
obtaining recognition/affiliation will be bound by such condition and any
departure there form renders the recognition/affiliation liable to be withdrawn.
(e) Even if the Government or the University does not expressly impose such a
condition, such condition is implicitly by virtue of the fact that in such a
situation, the activity of the private educational institution is liable to be termed
as 'State action'. The fact that these institutions perform an important public
function coupled with the fact that their activity closely inter-twined with
governmental activity, characterises their action as 'State sation'. At the
minimum, the requirement would be to act fairly in the matter of admission
'/students and probably in the matter of recruitment and treatment of its
employees as .1. These institutions are further bound not to charge any fee or
amount over and above what is charged in similar governmental institutions. If
they need finances, they must find them through donations or with the help of
religious or charitable organisations. They 'cannot also say that they will first
collect capitation fees and with that money, they will establish an institution. At
the worst, only the bare running charges can be charged from the students. The
capital cost cannot be charge from them.
153. Before we express ourselves upon the rival contentions urged by the parties, it
would be appropriate to notice the relevant statutory provisions: UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION ACT: 154.
The University Grants Commission Act was enacted by the Parliament 1956 to
provide the coordination and determination of standards in Universities and for that
purpose to establish University Grants Commission. Chapter-Ill deals with the powers
and functions of the mission. Section 12 empowers the Commission to take, in
consultation with the Universities other concerned bodies, all such steps as it may think
fit for the promotion and coordination University education and for the determination
and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and research in the Universities.
Section 12-A is relevant for our purposes. Clause (a) Sub-section (1) defines the
expression 'affiliation'. It reads:
'Affiliation' together with its grammatical variations, includes in relation to a
college, recognition or such college, association of such college with, and
admission of such college to the privileges of a University.
Clause (b) defines the expression 'college' in the following words:
College' means any institution whether known as such or by any other name
which provides for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a
University and which in accordance with the rules and regulations of such
University is recognised as competent to provide for such course of study and
present students undergoing such course of study for the examination for the
award of such qualification.
Sub-section (2) empowers the Commission inter alia to regulate the fee chargeable in
constituent and affiliated colleges, if such a course is found to be necessary to ensure
that "no candidate secures admission to such course of study by reason of economic
power and thereby events a more meritorious candidate from securing admission to
such course of study." It would : appropriate to set out Sub-section (2) in its entirety.
It reads:
Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of Section if, having
regard to,
(a) the nature of any course of study for obtaining any qualification
from any University,
(b) the types of activities in which persons obtaining such qualification
are likely to be engaged on the basis of such qualification,
(c) the minimum standards which a person possessing such
qualification should be able to maintain in his work relating to such
activities and the consequent need for ensuring, so far as may be, that
no candidate secures admission to such course of study by reason of
economic power and thereby prevents a more meritorious candidate
from securing admission to such course of study; and
(d) all other relevant factors,
the Commission is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public interest, it
may, after consultation with the University or Universities concerned, specify
the regulations the matters) in respect of which fees may be charged, and the
scale of fees in accordance with which fees: shall be charge in respect of those
matters on and from such date as may be specified in then regulations in this
behalf, by any college providing for such course of study from or in relation to
any student in connection with his admission to and prosecution of such course
for study: Provided that different matters and different scales of fees may be so
specified in relation to different Universities or different classes of colleges or
different areas.
Sub-section (3) then says that where regulations for the nature referred to in Sub-
section (2) have been made, no college shall levy or charge fees in excess of what is
specified. Sub-section (4) provides the consequence of violation by any college of such
regulations. Sub-section (5) says that violation she also mean disaffiliation. Section 14 prescribes the consequences of failure of Universities to comply with the
recommendations of the Commission. It includes withholding of funds. Sub-section (1)
of Section 22 which occurs in Chapter-IV declares that "the right of conferring or
granting degree shall be exercised only by a University established on incorporated by
or under a Central Act, a provincial Act or a State Act or an institution deemed to be a
University under Section 3 or an institution specially empowered by an Act of Parliament
to confer or grant degrees." Sub-section (2) emphatically declares that "save as
provided in Sub-section (1), no person or authority shall confer or grant or hold himself
or itself out as entitled to confer or grant any degree." Sub-section (3) defines the
expression "degree'. It means "any such degree as may, with the previous approval of
the Central Government, by specified in this behalf by the Commission by notification in
the official gazette." Section 23 prohibits the use of the word "University' in the name of
any institution other than a University established or incorporated under an enactment
or a deemed University. Section 24 provides for penalties for violation of Sections 22 and 23. Section 25 confers the rule making power upon the Central Government while
Section 26 confers the regulation making power upon the Commission. INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT : 155.
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted by the Parliament to provide for
the reconstitution of the Medical Council of India and the maintenance of a medical
register for India and for matters connected therewith. The expression 'recognised
medical qualification' is defined in Clause (h) of Section 2 to mean "any of the medical
qualifications included in the schedules." The expression "approved institution' has been
defined in Clause (a) to mean "a hospital, health center or every such institution
recognised by a University as an institution in which a person may undergo training, if
any, required by his course of study before the award of any medical qualification to
him." Section 11 declares that the medical qualifications granted by any University or
medical institution in India which are included in the first schedule to the Act shall be
recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of the Act. It also the procedure for
any University or Medical institution applying to the Central Government for recognising
new or other qualifications. Section 13 says that the medical qualifications granted by
medical institutions in India not included in the First Schedule but (Jed in Part-I of the
Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the as of the Act.
Section 19 provides for withdrawal of recognition in cases where the I finds lowering of
standards of proficiency, knowledge or skill. Section 21 provides maintenance of an
Indian Medical Register. Section 27 says that a person registered in Indian Medical
Council Register shall be entitled to practice as a medical practitioner in of India and to
recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges or fees
to which he is entitled. Section 32 confers the rule making power upon the Government
while Section 33 confers the regulation making power upon the Council. The Schedule
mentions the names of the Universities and the recognised medical qualifications
awarded by them. Same is done by Part I of the Third Schedule. ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT, 1987: 156.
This Act has been made by the Parliament for the establishment of the 'All India
Council technical Education' with a view to the proper planning and coordinated
development of technical education system throughout the country, promotion of
qualitative improvement such education and other allied matters. Section 3 of the Act
provides for the establishment he Council while Section 10 specifies the functions of the
Council. Apart from directing generally that the Council shall take all such steps as it
may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical
education and maintenance of standards, the Act specifically empowers the Council,
inter alia, to "(j) fix norms and guidelines for charging an and other fees; (k) grant
approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses of
programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned, and Hake all necessary steps
to prevent commercialisation of technical education." It is true, is no express provisions
in the Act which says that no engineering college or any other He or institution
imparting technical education shall be established except with the permission of the
Council. But this may be for the reason that such a power was intended to exercised by
the Council itself if it thinks necessary to do so. We are of the opinion that vast powers
conferred upon the Council by Section 10, including those specified above, extend to
and entitle it to issue an order to the above effect. It can also say that even in the
listing institutions, no new course, faculty or class shall be opened except with its
approval, also pass appropriate directions to the existing institutions as well for
achieving the poses of the Act. Such an order may indeed be necessary for a proper
discharge of the wide-ranging functions conferred upon the Council.
157. It is brought to our notice by the learned Counsel appearing for the Council that
the Council has evolved a proforma of undertaking which should be executed by the
person-in-charge of any institution proposed to be established stating inter alias that
such institution will I only observe the several orders and instructions issued by the
Council but it shall not charge capitation fee from the students/guardians of the
students in any form. The proforma further stipulates that in the event of non-
compliance of any of the orders and directions issued the Council or the terms of the
undertaking, it shall be open to the Council to take appropriate action including
withdrawal of its approval or recognition, which automatically Hails stoppage of
financial grant or assistance from the Central and State Government. It is also brought
to our notice that the Council has issued guidelines for admission to Engineer in Degree
and Engineering Diploma programmes in G.S.R. 320 dated 15th June, 1992 in exercise.
of the power conferred upon it by Section 23(1) of the Act (Section 23 of the Act
confers the regulation making power upon the Council). STATE ENACTMENTS: 158.
As mentioned in Part-1 of this judgement, the States of And lira Pradesh,
Karnataka Maharashtra and recently the State of Tamil Nadu have all enacted legislation
prohibiting charging of capitation fee. We had also set out the Preamble to the Andhra
Act which Preamble is to be found almost in every such enactment. We had referred to
the A.P. Education Act, 19831 as well which provides that no educational institution
shall be established in the State except; with the permission of the competent authority. INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1992: 159.
The last of the statutory provisions to be noticed is of great relevance herein viz.,
the; Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 being Ordinance No. 13 of
1992 issued by the President of India on 27th August, 1992. By this Ordinance, Section
10-A to, 10-C have been added besides amending Section 33. Section 10-A provides
that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act or any other
law for the time being in force, no medical college shall be established nor any new or
higher course of study or training opened in an existing institution nor shall it increase
its admission capacity in any course of study or training, except with the previous
permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the provisions of the
said section. The section prescribes the procedure for submitting the application, the
matters which the Central Government shall take into account while considering the said
application, the obligatory consultation with the Council and the manner in which the
application shall be disposed of. It also provides the matters which the Council should
take into consideration while making its recommendation to the Central Government.
Suffice it to mention that the several matters which the Council and the Central
Government are directed to take into consideration are designed to ensure that a
properly equipped institution is in place before it is permitted to impart medical
education. Section 10-B provides for non-recognition of medical qualifications awarded
by institutions which have been established without the previous permission of the
Central Government or by an institution which violates any of the conditions in Section
10-A. Section 10-C provides that if any person has established a medical college or has
opened a new or higher course of study in an existing college, he shall, within one year
from the date of the commencement of the Ordinance, seek permission of the Central
Government in accordance with Section 10-A. GROUND REALITY: 160.
Notwithstanding the fact that education is the second highest sector of budgeted
expenditure after the Defence, the outlay on education is woefully inadequate to the
needs of the people. Whereas many other countries spend six to eight per cent of their
Gross National Product on education, our expenditure on education is only three per
cent of the Gross National Product. Seventy five to eight per cent of the expenditure
goes in paying the salaries of the teachers and other connected staff. These are the
statements made in the Government of India publication "Challenge of Education - a
policy perspective" referred to herein before. Even so, on account of lack of proper
supervision, lack of self-discipline and commitment, the quality and standard of
instruction in most of the Government schools and colleges - except the professional
colleges - is woeful. This has provided an occasion and an opportunity to educational
institutions to fill the void, both in terms of meeting the need and more particularly in
the matter of quality of instruction. Because, the State is in no position to devote
resources and also because the need is constantly growing, it is not possible to do
without educational institutions. In this context, it is appropriate - may, necessary, to
notice of the Government of India in this behalf. It is thus: the Central Government
does have the resources to undertake any additional financial responsibility for medical
or technical education; it is unable to aid any private educational institution financially
at a level or, than at present; therefore the policy of the Central Government is to
involve private and voluntary efforts in the education sector in conformity with accepted
norms and goals: however, the private educational institutions cannot be compelled to
charge only that fee as barged in Governmental institutions; in 1986, the Central
Government has evolved the Education Policy' - according to it, "in the interests of
maintaining the standards and for reason other valid reasons, the commercialisation of
technical and professional education will be curbed. An alternative system will be
devised to involve private and voluntary effort in this sector of education, in conformity
with accepted norms and goals." (vide paras 6-20); the amendments proposed to I.M.C.
Act, 1956 in 1987 have not materialised so far; so far as Engineering colleges are
concerned, permission is being granted by the A.I.C.T.E. subject to condition that they
do not collect any capitation fee; according to the guidelines issued by A.I.C.T.E., the
technical colleges will be permitted to recover 'only a graded percentage he average
cost of student education, depending on whether the institution is Government funded,
Government-aided or un-aided.' (According to these guidelines, it is stated, the
students will be asked to pay 20% of the cost in Government-funded institutions, 30-
35% in Government-aided and 70% in un-aided institutions). It is finally submitted
that:
(a) Conferring unconditional and unqualified right to education at all levels to
every citizen involving a constitutional obligation on the State to establish
educational institutions either directly or through State agencies is not
warranted by the Constitution besides being unrealistic and impractical.
(b) When the Government grants recognition to private educational institutions
it does not create an agency to fulfill its obligations under the Constitution and
there is no scope to import concept of agency in such a situation.
(c) The principles laid down in Mohini Jain's case do require reconsideration.
(d) It would be unrealistic and unwise to discourage private initiative in
providing educational facilities particularly for higher education. The private
sector should be involved and indeed encouraged to augment the much needed
resources in the field of education, thereby making much progress as possible
in achieving the Constitutional goals in this respect.
(e) At the same time, regulatory controls have to be continued and
strengthened in order to prevent private educational institutions from
commercializing education.
(f) Regulatory measures should be maintained and strengthened so as to ensure
that private Educational institutions maintain minimum standards and facilities.
(g) Admissions within all groups and categories should be based on merit.
There may be reservation of seats in favour of the weaker sections of the
society and other groups which deserve special treatment. The norms for
admission should be pre-determined and transparent.
The stand of the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and
Jamil Nadu is no different.
161. The hard reality that emerges is that private educational institutions are a
necessity in they present day context. It is not possible to do without them because the
Governments are in no position to meet the demand - particularly in the sector of
medical and technical education which call for substantial outlays. While education is
one of the most important functions of/the Indian State it has no monopoly therein.
Private educational institutions - including' minority educational institutions-too have a
role to play.
162. Private educational institutions may be aided as well as un-aided. Aid given by
the- Government may be cent per cent or partial. So far as aided institutions are
concerned, it is evident, they have to abide by all the rules and regulations as may be
framed by t Government and/or recognising/affiliating authorities in the matter of
recruitment of teachers'4 and staff, their conditions of service, syllabus, standard of
teaching and so on. In particular, in the matter of admission of students, they have to
follow the rule of merit and merit alone- subject to any reservations made under Article
15. They shall not been titled to charge any fees higher than what is charged in
Governmental institutions for similar courses. These are) and shall be understood to be
the conditions of grant of aid. The reason is simple: public funds, when given as grant -
and not as loan-carry the public character wherever they go; Public funds cannot be
donated for private purposes. The element of public character necessarily means a fair
conduct in all respects consistent with the constitutional mandate of Articles 14 and 15.
All the Governments and other authorities in charge of granting aid to educational
institutions shall expressly provide for such conditions (among others), if not already
provided, and shall ensure compliance with the same. Again aid may take several forms.
For example, a medical college does necessarily require a hospital. We are told that for
a 100 seat medical college, there must be a fully equipped 700-bed hospital. Then
alone, the medical college can be allowed to function. A private medical college may not
have or may not establish a hospital of its own. It may request the Government and the
Government may permit it to avail of the services of a Government hospital for the
purpose of the college free of charge. This would also be as form of aid and the
conditions aforesaid have to be imposed-may be with some relaxation in the matter of
fees chargeable-and observed. The Governments (Central and State) and all other
authorities granting aid shall impose such conditions forthwith, if not already imposed.
These conditions shall apply to existing as well as proposed private educational
institutions.
163. So far as un-aided institutions are concerned, it is obvious that they cannot be
compelled to charge the same fee as is charged in Governmental institutions. If they do
so voluntarily, it is perfectly welcome but they cannot be compelled to do so, for the
simple reason that they have to meet the cost of imparting education from their own
resources-and the main source, apart from donations/charities, if any, can only be the
fees collected from the students. It is here that the concepts of 'self-financing
educational institutions' and 'cost-based educational institutions' come in. This situation
presents several difficult problems. How does one determine the 'cost of education' and
how and by whom can it be regulated? The cost of education may vary, even within the
same faculty, from institution to institution. The facilities provided, equipment,
infrastructure, standard and quality of education obtaining may vary from institution to
institution. The court cannot certainly do this. It must be done by Government or
University or such other authority as may be designated in that behalf. Even so, some
questions do arise-whether cost-based education only means running charges or can it
take in capital outlay? Who pays or who can be made to pay for establishment,
expansion and improvement/diversification of a private educational institutions? Can an
individual or body of persons first collect amounts (by whatever name called) from the
intending students and with those monies establish an institution-an activity similar to
builders of apartments in the cities? How much should the students coming in later
years pay? Who should work to the economics of each institution? Any solution evolved
has to take into account all these variable factors. But one thing is clear:
commercialisation of education cannot and should not permitted. The Parliament as well
as State Legislatures have expressed this intention in Unmistakable terms. Both in the
light of our tradition and from the stand-point of interest of general public,
commercialisation is positively harmful; it is opposed to public policy. As we all
presently point out, this is one of the reasons for holding that imparting education
cannot trade, business or profession. The question is how to encourage private
educational institutions without allowing them to commercialise the education? This is
the troublesome question facing the society, the government and the courts today. But
before we proceed to Evolve a scheme to meet this problem, it is necessary to answer a
few other questions raised before us. RIGHT TO ESTABLISH AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION; 164.
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution declares that all citizens of this country shall
have the K "to practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business". Clause (6) of the 19, however, says:
Nothing in Sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
law in so far as imposes or prevents the State from making any law imposing,
in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of
the right conferred by the said clause and, in articular, nothing in the said sub-
clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so as it relates to or
prevents the State from making any law relating to:
(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for c any
profession or on any occupation, trade or business, or
(ii) carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled
by the State or any trade, lousiness, industry or service whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or Otherwise.
While we do not wish to express any opinion on the question whether the right to
establish educational institution can be said to be carrying on any "occupation" within
the meaning of Article 19(1)(g), - perhaps, it is - we are certainly of the opinion that
such activity can neither make a trade or business nor can it be a profession within the
meaning of Article 19(1)(g). Trade or business normally connotes an activity carried on
with a profit motive. Education has never commerce in this country. Making it one is
opposed to the ethos, tradition and eligibilities of this nation. The argument to the
contrary has an unholy ring to it. Imparting education has never been treated as a trade
or business in this country since times memorial. It has been treated as a religious
duty. It has been treated as charitable activity. Jut never as trade or business. We agree
with Gajendragadkar, J. that "education in its true Inspect is more a mission and as
vocation rather than a profession or trade or business, however Wide may be the
denotation of the two latter words..."(see University of Delhi 1961(1) SCR 03 . The
Parliament too has manifested its intention repeatedly (by enacting the U.G.C. Act, Act
and A.I.C.T.E. Act that commercialisation of education is not permissible and that |no
person shall be allowed to steal a march over a more meritorious candidate because of
his economic power. The very same intention is expressed by the Legislatures of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu in the Preamble to their respective
enactment prohibiting charging of capitation fee.
165. We are, therefore, of the opinion, adopting the line of reasoning in R.M.D.C. v.
State till Bombay MANU/SC/0019/1957 : [1957]1SCR874 , that imparting education
cannot be treated as trade or business. Education cannot be allowed to be converted
into commerce nor can the petitioners seek to obtain the said result by relying upon the
wider meaning of "occupation". The content of the ' expression "occupation" has to be
ascertained keeping in mind the fact that Clause (g) employs all the four expressions
viz., profession, occupation, trade and business. Their fields may; overlap, but each of
them does certainly have a content of its own, distinct from the others). Be that as it
may, one thing is clear imparting of education is not and cannot be allowed 16 become
commerce. A law, existing or future, ensuring against it would be a valid measures
within the meaning of Clause (6) of Article 19. We cannot, therefore, agree with the
contrary proposition enunciated in 1968 Bombay 91, 1984 A.P. 251 and 1986 Karnataka 119.
166. The learned Counsel for the petitioners relied upon certain decisions in support of
their contention that right to establish an educational institution flows from Article
19(1)(g). The first is in Bharat Sevashram Singh v. State of Gujarat
MANU/SC/0060/1986 : [1986]3SCR602 , a decision of a Bench consisting of E.S.
Venkataramiah and Ranganath Misra, JJ. At page 60, while dealing 1 with Section 33 of
Gujarat Secondary Education Act empowering the Government to take over of an
educational institution in certain situations for a period not exceeding five years, the
learned Judges observed that "the said provisions is introduced in the interest of the
general public and does not in any way affect prejudicially the fundamental right of the
management guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution." Actually, the issue
now before us was not raised or considered in the said decision. Moreover, the decision
does not say whether it is as profession, occupation, trade or business.
Reliance is then placed upon the Seven Judge Bench decision in Bangalore Water
Supply and Sewerage Board v. Rajappa MANU/SC/0257/1978 : (1978)ILLJ349SC .
Krishna Iyer, J. dealing with the meaning of the expression "industry" in I.D. Act
observed that even educational institutions would fall within the purview of "industry".
We do not think the said observation in a different context has any application here.
So far as the other decision in State of Maharashtra v. Lok Shikshan Sanstha
MANU/SC/0055/1971 : 1971 Supp. S.C.R. 879 is concerned, all that the court held
there was that in view of the operation of emergency, Article 19 is not available to the
petitioners seeking to establish an educational institution. Article 358 was held to be a
bar. But the decision does not say that such a right does inhere in the petitioners.
167. We are also of the opinion that the said activity cannot be called a 'profession'
within the meaning of Article 19(1)(g). It is significant to notice the words "to practice
any profession". Employees v. Industrial Tribunal A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1085 . Establishing
educational institutions can by no stretch of imagination be treated as "practicing any
profession". Teaching may be as profession but establishing an institution, employing
teaching and non-teaching staff, procuring the necessary intrastate for running a school
or college is not 'practising profession'. It may be anything but not practising a
profession. We must make of clear that we have not gone into the precise meaning and
content of the expressions profession, occupation, trade or business for the reason that
it is not necessary for us to do so in view of the approach we are adopting hereinafter,
which would be evident from succeeding paragraphs. Our main concern in the entire
preceding discussion is only to Wish that the activity of establishing and/or running an
educational institution cannot be of commerce.
168. For the purpose of these cases, we shall proceed on the assumption that a person
or body Sons has a right to establish an educational institution in this country. But this
right, we I make it clear, is not an absolute one. It is subject to such law as may be
made by the State s interest of general public.
169. We must, however, make it clear, and which is of crucial importance herein, that
the right Stablish an educational institution does not carry with it the right to
recognition or the t to affiliation. In St. Xaviers. College v. Gujarat
MANU/SC/0088/1974 : [1975]1SCR173 it has been held uniformly by all the nine
learned Judges that there is no fundamental right to affiliation. Ray, C.J, stated that this
has been "the consistent view of this Court." They also recognised that recognition or
affiliation is essential for a meaningful exercise of the right to establish and Minister
educational institutions. Recognition may be granted either by the Government or
Mother authority or body empowered to accord recognition. Similarly, affiliation may be
stated either by the University or any other academic or other body empowered to grant
an educational institution, admit students, impart education conduct to other
educational institutions. In other words, it is open to a person to establish an
educational institution, admit students, impart education, conduct examination and
award certificates to them. But he, or the educational institution has no right to insist
that the certificates or degree (if they can be called as such) awarded by such institution
should be recognised by the State - much less have they the right to say that the
students trained by the institution should be admitted to examinations conducted by the
University or by the Government or any other authority, as the case may be. The
institution has to seek such cognition or affiliation from the appropriate agency. Grant
of recognition and/or affiliation of a matter of course nor is it a formality. Admission to
the privileges of a University is power to be exercised with great care, keeping in view
the interest of the general public and nation. It is a matter of substantial significance-
the very life-blood of a private educational intitution. Ordinarily speaking, no
educational institution can run or survive unless it is recognised by the Government or
the appropriate authority and/or is affiliated to one or the her Universities in the
country. Unless it is recognised and/or affiliated as stated above, its Certificates will be
of no use. No one would join such educational institution. As a matter of let, by virtue
of the provisions of the U.G.C. Act, noticed hereinabove, no educational & institution in
this country except a University is entitled to award degrees. It is for this reason that all
the private educational institutions seek recognition and/or affiliation with a view to
table them to send the students trained by them to appear at the examinations
conducted by He Government/University. The idea is that if such students pass the said
examination, the Government/University will award its degree/diploma/certificate to
them. These educational Institutions follow the syllabus prescribed by the
Government/University, have the same courses of study, follow the same method of
teaching and training. They do not award their on degrees/qualifications. They prepare
their students for University/Government examinations, request the
University/Government to permit them to appear at the examinations conducted by
them and to award the appropriate degrees to them. Clearly and indubitably, the
recognised/affiliated private educational institutions, supplement the function performed
by he institutions of the State. Theirs is not an independent activity but one closely
allied to and Supplemental to the activity of the State. In the above circumstances, it is
ideal to contend that imparting of education is a business like any other business or that
it is an activity akin to an other activity like building of roads, bridges etc. In short, the
position is this: No education institution except an University can award degrees
(Sections 22 and 23 of the U.G.C. Act).' private educational institutions cannot award
their own degrees. Even if they award certificates or other testimonials they have no
practical, value in as much as they are not good for obtaining any employment under
the State or for admission into higher courses of study. The private educational
institutions merely supplement the effort of the State in educating the people, as
explained above. It is not an independent activity. It is an activity supplemental to the
principal activity carried on by the State'. No private educational institution can survive
or subsist without recognition and/or affiliation. The bodies which grant recognition
and/o affiliation are the authorities of the State. In such a situation, it is obligatory - in
the interest! of general public-upon the authority granting recognition or affiliation to
insist upon such of conditions as are appropriate to ensure not only education of
requisite standard but also fairness and equal treatment in the matter of admission of
students. Since the recognising affiliating authority is the 'State, it is under an
obligation to impose such conditions as par of its duty enjoined upon it by Article 14 of
the Constitution. It cannot allow it self or its power and privilege to be used unfairly.
The incidents attaching to the main activity attach supplemental activity as well.
Affiliation/recognition is not there for anybody to get it gratis or unconditionally. In our
opinion, no Government, authority or University is justified or is? entitled to grant
recognition/affiliation without imposing such conditions. Doing so would| amount to
abdicating its obligations enjoined upon it by Part-III its activity is bound to be:
characterised as unconstitutional and illegal. To reiterate, what applies to the main
activity applies equally to supplemental, activity. The State cannot claim immunity from
they obligations arising from Articles 14 and 15. If so, it cannot confer such immunity
upon its affiliates. Accordingly, we have evolved-with the help of the counsel appearing
before us; and keeping in view the positive features of the several Central and State
enactments referred; to herein before - the following scheme which every authority
granting recognition/affiliation shall impose upon the institutions seeking such
recognition/affiliation.
The idea behind the scheme is to eliminate discretion in the management altogether in
the matter of admission. It is the discretion in the matter of admission that is at the root
of the, several ills complained of. It is the discretion that has mainly led to the
commercialisation of education. 'Capitation fee' means charging or collecting amount
beyond what is permitted by law; all the Acts have defined this expression in this sense.
We must strive to bring about a situation where there is no room or occasion for the
management or any one of its behalf to demand or collect any amount beyond what is
permitted. We must clarify that charging the permitted fees by the private educational
institutions - which is bound to be higher than the fees charged in similar governmental
institutions by it self cannot be characterised as capitation fees. This is the policy
underlying all the four States enactments prohibiting capitation fees. All of them
recognise the necessity of charging higher fees by private educational institutions. They
seek to regulate the fees that can be charged by them - which may be called permitted
fees and to bar them from collecting anything other than the permitted fees, which is
what 'Capitation fees' means. Our attempt in evolving the following scheme precisely is
to given effect to the said legislative policy. It would be highly desirable if this scheme
is given -a a statutory shape by incorporating it in the Rules that may be framed under
these, enactments.
SCHEME 170. The scheme evolved here with is in the nature of guidelines which the appropriate
Governments and recognising and affiliating authorities shall impose and implement in
addition to such other conditions and stipulations as they may think appropriate as
conditions for grant of permission, grant of recognition or grant of affiliation, as the
case may be. We are confining the scheme - for the present - only to 'professional
colleges.'
The expression 'professional colleges' in this scheme includes:
(i) medical colleges, dental colleges and other institutions and colleges
imparting Nursing, Pharmacy and other courses allied to Medicine, established
and/or run by private education institutions,
(ii) colleges of engineering and colleges and institutions imparting technical
education including electronics, computer sciences, established and/or run by
private education institutions, and
(iii) such other colleges to which this scheme is made applicable by the
Government, recognising and/or affiliating authority.
The expression "appropriate authority" means the Government, University or other
authority as is competent to grant permission establish or to grant recognition to a
professional college.
The expression 'competent authority' in the scheme means the Government/University
or other authority, as may be designated by the Government/University or by law, as is
competent to allot students for admission to various professional colleges in the given
State.
It is made clear that only those institutions which seek permissions to establish and/or
recognition and/or affiliation from the appropriate authority shall alone be made bound
by this scheme. This scheme is not applicable to colleges run by Government or to
University colleges. In short, the scheme hereinafter mentioned shall be made a
condition of permission, recognition or affiliation, as the case may be. For each of them
viz., grant of permission, grant of recognition, grant of affiliation, these conditions shall
necessarily be imposed, in addition to such other conditions as the appropriate
authority may think appropriate. No private educational institution shall be allowed to
sent its students to appear for an examination held by it or under any law or to any
examination held by any University unless the concerned institution and the relevant
course of study is recognised by the appropriate authority and/or is affiliated to
appropriate University, as the case may be.
(1) A professional college shall be permitted to be established and/or
administered only by a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 (or the corresponding Act, if any, in force in a given State), or by a Public
Trust, religious or charitable, registered under the Trusts Act, Wakfs Act (or the
corresponding legislation, if any, e.g., Tamil Nadu Religious and Charitable
Endowments Act and A.P. Religious and Charitable Endowments Act.) No
individual, firm company or other body of individuals, by whatever appellation
called - except those mentioned above - will be permitted to establish and/or
administer a professional college. All the existing professional colleges which
do not conform to the above norm shall be directed to take appropriate steps to
comply with the same within a period of six months from today. In default
whereof, recognition/affiliation accorded shall stand with drawn. (In this
connection reference may be had to Rule 86(2) of Maharashtra Grant-in-aid
code (referred to in State of Maharashtra v. Lok Shikshan Sanstha
MANU/SC/0055/1971 : 1971 Supp. S.C.R. 879 which provided that schools
which are not registered under the Societies Registration Act, shall not be
eligible for grant. Grant of recognition and affiliation is no less significance).
(2) At least, 50% of the seats in every professional college shall be filled by the
nominees of the government of University, as the case may be, hereinafter
referred to as "free seats". These students shall be selected on the basis of
merit determined on the basis of a common entrance "examination where it is
held or in the absence of an entrance examination, by such criteria as may be
determined by the competent authority or the appropriate authority, as the case
may be. It is, however, desirable and appropriate to have a common entrance
exam for regulating admissions to these colleges/institutions, as in done in the
State of Andhra Pradesh. The remaining 50% seats (payment seats) shall be
filled by those candidates who are prepared to pay the fee prescribed there for
and who have complied with the instructions regarding deposit and furnishing
of cash security/Bank guarantee for the balance of the amount. The allotment of
students against payment seats shall also be done on the basis of inter se merit
determined on the same basis as in the case of free seats. There shall be no
quota reserved for the management or for any family, caste or community
which may have established such college. The criteria of eligibility and all other
conditions shall be the same in respect of both free seats and payment seats.
The only distinction shall be the requirement of higher fee by the "payment
students'. The Management of a professional college shall not be entitled to
impose or prescribe any other and further eligibility criteria or condition for
admission either to free seats or to payment seats. It shall, however, be open
to a professional college to provide for reservation of seats for constitutionally
permissible classes with the approval of the affiliating University. Such
reservations, if any, shall be made and notified to the competent authority and
the appropriate authority at least one month prior to the issuance of notification
calling for applications for admission to such category of colleges. In such a
case, the competent authority shall allot students keeping in view the
reservations provided by a college. The rule for merit shall be followed even in
such reserved categories.
(3) The number of seats available in the professional colleges (to which this
scheme is made applicable) shall be fixed by the appropriate authority. No
professional college shall be permitted to increase its strength except under the
permission or authority granted by the appropriate authority.
(4) No professional college shall call for applications for admission separately
or individually. All the applications for admission to all the seats available in
such colleges shall be called for by the competent authority alone, along with
applications for admission to Government/University colleges of similar nature.
For example, there shall be only one notification by the competent authority
calling for applications for all the medical colleges in the State and one
notification for all the engineering colleges in the State and so on. The
application forms for admission shall be issued by the competent authority
(from such offices, center and places as he may direct). The application form
shall contain a column or a separate part wherein an applicant can indicate
whether he wishes to be admitted against a payment seat and the order of
preference, upto three professional colleges.
(5) Each professional college shall intimate the authority, the State Government
and the concerned University in advance the fees chargeable for the entire
course commencing that academic year. The total fees shall be divided into the
number of years/semesters of study in that course. In the first instance, fees
only for the first year/semester shall be collected. The payment students will
be, however, required to furnish either cash security or bank guarantee for the
fees payable for the remaining years/semesters. The fees chargeable in each
professional college shall be subject to the ceiling prescribed by the appropriate
authority or by a competent Court. The competent authority shall issue a
brochure, on payment of appropriate charges, along- with the application form
for admission, giving full particulars of the courses and the number of seats
available, the names of the colleges, their location and also the fees chargeable
by each professional college. The brochure will also specify the minimum
eligibility conditions, the method of admission (whether by entrance test or
otherwise) and other relevant particulars.
(6)(a) Every State Government shall forthwith constitute a Committee to fix the
ceiling on the fees chargeable by a professional college or class of professional
colleges, as the case may be. The Committee shall consist of a Vice-Chancellor,
Secretary for Education (or such Joint Secretary, as he may nominate) and
Director, Medical Education/Director Technical Education. The committee shall
make such enquiry as it thinks appropriate. It shall, however, give opportunity
to the professional colleges (or their association (s), if any) to place such
material, as they think fit. It shall, however, not be bound to give any personal
hearing to anyone or follow any technical rules of law. The Committee shall fix
the fee once every three years or at such longer intervals, as it may think
appropriate.
(b) It would be appropriate if the U.G.C. frames regulations under Section 12A (3) of the U.G.C. Act, regulating the fees which the affiliated colleges, operating
on no-grant-in-aid basis, are entitled to charge. The Council for Technical
Education may also consider the advisability of issuing directions under Section 10 of the A.I.C.T.E. Act regulating the fees that may be charged in private
unaided educational institutions imparting technical education. The Indian
Medical Council and the Central government may also consider the advisability
of such regulation as a conditions for grant of permission to new medical
colleges under Section 10-A and to impose such a condition on existing
colleges under Section 10-C.
(c) The several authorities mentioned in sub-paras (a) and (b) shall decide
whether a private educational institution is entitled to charge only that fee as is
required to run the college or whether the capital cost involved in establishing a
college can also be passed on to the students and if so, in what manner.
Keeping in view the need, the interest of general public and of the nation, a
policy decision may be taken. It would be more appropriate if the Central
government and these several authorities (U.G.C, I.M.C. and A.I.C.T.E.)
coordinate their efforts and evolve a broadly uniform criteria in this behalf.
Until the Central government, U.G.C, I.M.C. and A.I.C.T.E. issue
orders/regulations in this behalf, the committee referred to in the sub-para (a)
of this para shall be operative. In other words, the working and orders of the
committee shall be subject to the orders/regulations, issued by Central
Government, U.G.C, I.M.C. or A.I.C.T.E., as the case may be.
(d) We must hasten to add that what we have said in this clause is merely a
reiteration of the duty-may, obligation - placed upon the Governments of
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu by their respective
legislatures - to wit, Section 7 of Andhra Pradesh Act 5 of 1983, Section 4 of
Maharashtra Act 6 of 1988, Section 5 of Karnataka Act of 1984 and Section 4 of
Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1992. Other States too may have to have similar
provisions, carrying statutory force.
(7) Any candidate who fulfils the eligibility conditions would be entitle to apply
for admission. After the free seats in professional colleges are filled up, at least
10 days' time will be given to the candidates (students) to opt to be admitted
against payment seats. The candidates shall be admitted against payment seats.
The candidates shall be entitled to indicate their choice for any three colleges
(if available). In such a case, he shall comply with the deposit and cash
security/bank guarantee - taking the institution charging the highest fees as the
basis - within the said period of ten days. If he is admitted in an institution,
charging less fee, the difference amount shall be refunded to him. The cash
security or Bank guarantee shall be in favour of the competent authority, who
shall transfer the same in favour of the appropriate college if that student is
admitted).
(8) The results of the entrance examination, if any, held should be published at
least in two leasing newspapers, one in English and the other in vernacular.
The payment candidates shall be allotted to different professional colleges on
the basis of merit-cum-choice. The allotment shall be made by the competent
authority. A professional college shall be bound to admit the students so
allotted. The casual vacancies or unfilled vacancies, if any, shall also be filled in
the same manner. The management of a professional college shall not be
permitted to admit any student other than the one allotted by the competent
authority - whether against free seat or payment seat, as the case may be. It is
made clear that even in the matter of reserved categories, if any, the principle
of inter se merit shall be followed. All allotments made shall be published in
two leading newspapers as aforesaid an on the notice boards of the respective
colleges and at such other places as the competent authority may direct, along
with the marks obtained by each candidate in the relevant entrance test or
qualifying examination, as the case may be. No professional college shall be
entitled to ask for any other or further payment or amount, under whatever
name it may be called, from any student allotted to it - whether against the free
seat or payment seat.
(9) After making the allotments, the competent authority shall also prepare and
publish a waiting list of the candidates along with the marks obtained by them
in the relevant test/examination. The said list shall be followed for filling up
any casual vacancies or 'dropout' vacancies arising after the admissions are
finalised. These vacancies shall be filled until such date as may be prescribed
by the competent authority. Any vacancies still remaining after such date can be
filled by the Management.
It is made clear that it shall be open to the appropriate authority and the
competent authority to issue such further instructions or directions, as they
made think appropriate not inconsistent with this scheme, by way of
elaboration and elucidation.
This scheme shall apply to and govern the admissions to professional colleges
commencing from the academic year 1993-94.
We are aware that until the commencement of the current academic year, the
Andhra Pradesh was following a somewhat different pattern in the matter of
filling the seats in private unaided engineering colleges. Though all the
available seats were being filled by the allottees of the convenor (State) - and
the managements were not allowed to admit any student on their own - a
uniform fee was collected from all the students. The concepts of free seats; and
'payment seats' were therefore not relevant in such a situation - all were
payment seats only. We cannot say that such a system is constitutionally not
permissible. But our idea in devising this scheme has been to provide more
opportunities to meritorious students, who may not be able to pay the
enhanced fee prescribed by the government for such colleges. The system
devised by us would mean correspondingly more financial burden on payment
students whereas in the aforesaid system (in vogue in Andhra Pradesh) the
financial burden is equally distributed among all the students. The theoretical
foundation for our method is that a candidate/student who is stealing a march
over his compatriot on account of his economic power should be made not only
to pay for himself but also to pay for another meritorious student. This is the
social justification behind the fifty percent rule prescribed in Clause (2) of this
scheme. In the interest of uniformity and in the light of the above social theory,
we direct the State of Andhra Pradesh to adhere to the system derived by us.
171. In view of the above, we do not think it necessary to go into or answer Question
No. 3. On our opinion, the said question requires debate in a greater depth and any
expression of opinion thereon at this juncture is not really warranted. PART-IV VALIDITY OF SECTION 3-A OF THE ANDHRA PRADESH EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (REGULATION OF ADMISSION AND PROHIBITION OF CAPITATION FEB) ACT, 1983. 172.
Section 3-A of the aforesaid Act, as introduced by the Andhra Pradesh Amendment
Act 12 of 1992, read as follows:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, but subject to such rules as
may be made in this behalf and the Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions
(Regulation of admission) Order, 1974, it shall be lawful for the management of
any unaided private engineering college, dental college and such other class of
unaided educational institutions as may be notified by the Government in this
behalf to admit students into such colleges or educational institutions to the
extent of one half of the total number of seats from among those who have
qualified in the common entrance test or in the qualifying examination, as the
case may be, referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section 3 irrespective of the
ranking assigned to them in such test or examination and nothing contained in
Section 5 shall apply to such admissions.
A Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh Court has struck it down as being violative of Article
14 of the Constitution and also on the ground of repugnancy with Section 12-A of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (Kranti Sangram Parishad v. Sri N.J. Reddy -
MANU/AP/0272/1992 : 1992(3)ALT99 ). The correctness of the said decision is assailed
before us.
173. This Section is in truth, in the nature of an exception to the other provisions of
the Act. It says that notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, but subject to the
rules as may be framed by the Government in this behalf, the private educational
institutions of the nature mentioned therein, shall be entitle to admit students to the
extent of half the number of seats from among those who have qualified in the common
entrance test or the qualifying examination, as the case may be. This statement is
accompanied by two significant features viz., (1) admission of such students could be
irrespective of the ranking assigned to them in the common entrance test or other
qualifying examination, as the case may be; and (2) it is made clear that nothing
continued in Section 5 shall apply to such admissions. The Section is, thus, an
exception to Section 3, 5. Section 3, it may be remembered, provides that admissions
have to be made, to all categories, strictly in accordance with merit. The Section, read
as a whole, leads to the following consequences:
(a) It is open to the private educational institutions to charge as much amount
as they can for admission. It will be matter of bargain between the institution
and the student seeking admission.
(b) The admission can be made without reference to inter-se merit of paying
candidates. The institution will be entitled to pick and choose the candidates
among the applicants on such consideration as it may deem fit.
(c) Section 5, which prohibits collection of capitation fee by an education
institution, is expressly made inapplicable to such admissions. This is not
without a purpose. The purpose is to permit the institutions to charge as much
as they can in addition to the collection of the prescribed tuition fee.
174. We have held hereinbefore that the educational activity of the private educational
institutions is supplemental to the main effort by the State and that what applies to the
main activity applies equally to the supplemental activity as well. If Article 14 of the
Constitution applies - as it does, without a doubt - to the State institutions and compels
them to admit students on the basis of merit and merit along (subject, of course, to any
permissible reservations - wherein too, merit inter-se has to be followed) the
applicability of Article 14 cannot be excluded from the supplemental effort/activity. The
State Legislature had, therefore, no power to say that a private educational institution
will be entitled to admit students of its choice, irrespective of merit or that it is entitled
to charge as much as it can, which means a free hand for exploitation and more
particularly, commercialisation of education, which is impermissible in law. No such
immunity from the constitutional obligation can be claimed or conferred by the State
Legislature. On this ground alone, the Section is liable to fail.
In the circumstances, it is not necessary for us to go into the question whether the
section is bad on account of repugnancy with Section 12-A of the University Grants
Commission Act. It is enough to say that the said section falls foul of Article 14 for the
reason given above and must accordingly fail. We agree that the offending portions of
Section 3-A cannot be severed from the main body of the section and, therefore, the
whole section is liable to fall to the ground.
It is not brought to our notice that the enactments of other three States viz., Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra contain similar offending provisions. Indeed, they do not.
None of their provisions says that the Management of a private educational institution
can admit students, against "payment seats", "Irrespective of the ranking assigned to
them in such test (entrance test) or examination." Much less do they say that to such
admissions, the provision prohibiting capitation fee shall not apply. True, they do not
say expressly that such admissions shall be made on the basis of merit, but that,
according to us, is implicit. If the notifications, or orders issued thereunder provide
otherwise, either expressly or by implication, they would be equally bad for the reason
given above.
175. Once Section 3-A is struck down, the question arises as to what should happen to
the students who were admitted by the Private Engineering Colleges in this State, at
their own discretion, to the extent of the 50% of the available seats. The High court has
invalidated these admissions but they are continuing now by virtue of the orders of stay
granted by this Court. A Ct. which must be kept in mind in this behalf is this: Until the
previous year, the Government of Andhra Pradesh has been permitting these private
engineering colleges to collect a higher fees from the students allotted to them. (We are
told that the fees permitted to the collected was Rs. 10,000/- per annum for the
previous year). Of course, all the available seats were filled up by students Slotted by
the convenor of the common entrance exam; no one could be admitted by these
colleges their own. Now, for the current year, these colleges admitted 50% of the
students in their own discretion-which necessarily means collection of capitation and/or
arbitrary admissions for their private reasons. At the same time, these colleges have
been collecting the same fees (Rs. 10,000/- per annum) both from the students allotted
by the convenor as also from those admitted themselves. Thus they have reaped a
double advantage.
176. It is submitted by Shri Shanti Bhushan the learned Counsel for these students that
they were innocent parties and had obtained admission in a bonafide belief that their
admissions were being made properly. They have been studying since then and in a few
months their academic year ill come to a close. May be, the managements were guilty
or irregularity, he says, but so far as students are concerned they have done nothing
contrary to law to deserve the punishment warded by the Full Bench to the High Court.
177. It is true, as pointed out by the High Court that these admissions were made in a
hurry Lit the fact remains that they have been continuing in the said course under the
orders of this Court the last about four months. As stated hereinbefore, the present
situation has been brought by a combination of circumstances namely viz; the
enactment of Section 3-A, the allotment of students to the extent of 50% only by the
convenor and the failure of the Government to Immediately rectify the
misunderstanding of the convenor. In the circumstances we are not satisfied that these
students should be sent out at this stage. May be, the result is rather unfortunate but
we have to weigh all the relevant circumstances. At the same time we are of the opinion
that the managements of these private engineering colleges should not be allowed to
walk away with: double advantage referred to above. Since they have admitted students
of their own choice to he extent of 50% and also because it is not possible to
investigate or verify for what consideration those admissions were made, we think it
appropriate to direct that these colleges should charge only that fee from the 50% 'free
students' as is charged for similar courses in the concerned university engineering
colleges. For the remaining years of their course these colleges shall collect |only the
said fee, which for the sake of convenience may be called the 'government fee'. The
balance of the amount which they have already collected during this year shall be
remitted into the Government account within six weeks from today, in default whereof
the recognition and affiliation given to these colleges shall stand withdrawn. In other
words whichever college fails to comply with the above direction it will stand
disaffiliated on the expiry of six weeks from today and the recognition granted to it, if
any, by any appropriate authority shall also stand withdrawn 178. So far as Writ Petition 855 of 1992 is concerned, it complains of charging of
double the tuition fee in case of students coming from outside the Maharashtra. The
matter stand concluded against the petitioners by a decision of a Constitution Bench of
this Court in D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0012/1955 :
[1955]1SCR1215 . This Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
179. Coming to Civil Appeal No. 3573 of 1992 filed by Mahatma Gandhi Mission, we
are inclined, in all the facts and circumstances of the case of stay the operation of the
impugned order which is only an interlocutory order effective till the disposal of the
main Writ Petition. Writ Petition may be disposed of according to law and in the light of
this Judgment. PART-V 180.
For the above reasons the Writ Petitions and Civil Appeals except (W.P. (C) 855/92, C.A. 3573/92 and the Civil Appeals arising from S.L. Ps. 13913 and 13940/92) are disposed of in the following terms: 1. The citizens of this country have a fundamental right to education. The said
right flows from Article 21. This right is, however, not an absolute right. Its
content and para meters have to be determined in the light of Articles 45 and
41. In other words every chi Id/citizen of this country has a right to free
education until he completes the age of fourteen years. Thereafter his right to
education is subject to the limits of economic capacity and development of the
State 2. The obligations created by Articles 41, 45 and 46 of the Constitution can be
discharged by the State either by establishing institutions of its own or by
aiding, recognising and/or granting affiliation to private educational
institutions. Where aid is not granted to private educational institutions and
merely recognition or affiliation is granted it may not be insisted that the
private education institution shall charge only that fee as is charged for similar
courses in governmental institutions. The private educational institutions have
to and are entitled to charge a higher fee, not exceeding the ceiling fixed in that
behalf. The admission of students and the charging of fee in these private
educational institutions shall be governed by the scheme evolved herein - set
out in Part-Ill of this Judgment.
3. A citizen of this country may have a right to establish an educational
institution but no citizen, person or institution has a right much less a
fundamental right, to affiliation or recognition or to grant-in-aid from the State.
The recognition and/or affiliation shall be given by the State subject only to the
conditions set out in, and only accordance with the scheme continued in Part-Ill
of this Judgment. No Government/University or authority shall be competent to
grant recognition or affiliation except in accordance with the said scheme. The
said scheme shall constitute a condition of such recognition or affiliation, as the
case may be, in addition to such other conditions and terms which such
Government, University or other authority may choose to impose. Those
receiving aid shall, however, be subject to all such terms and conditions, as the
aid giving authority may impose in the interest of general public.
4. Section 3-A of the Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation Of
Admission And Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1983 is violative of the
equality Clause enshrined in Article 14 and is accordingly declared void. The
declaration of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in this behalf is affirmed.
5. Writ Petition No. 855 of 1992 is dismissed.
Civil Appeal No. 3573 of 1992 is allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
The main Writ Petition wherein the said interim order has been passed may now
be disposed of according to law.
6. Civil Appeals arising from S.L.P. 13913 and 13940/92 (preferred by students
who were admitted by private unaided engineering colleges in Andhra Pradesh,
without an allotment from the convenor of the common entrance examination)
are allowed. The students so admitted for the academic year 1992-93 be
allowed to continue in the said course but the management shall comply with
the direction given in para 77 hereinabove.
