The Supreme Court has observed that there is no fundamental right to education for a professional degree under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.A bench comprising Justices S.M. Subramaniam and Ajay Rastogi observed that the right to education for a professional degree is not included within the ambit of Article 45 of the Constitution, which provides for free and compulsory education to all children of the The Supreme Court has observed that the right to education flows directly from the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of Constitution. "The right to education flows directly from the Right to Life guaranteed under Article 21. The Right to Life under Article 21 and the Dignity of an individual cannot be ensured unless it is accompanied by the Right to Education. The State is under an obligation to make endeavour to provide The Supreme Court has observed that the right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution of India. "The right to education is a Fundamental Right guaranteed under Article 21-A of the Constitution of India. The State is under an obligation to provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of 6 to 14 years in such a manner as may be prescribed The Supreme Court observed that there is no fundamental right to establish an educational institution under Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed that the right to establish and run an educational institution is not a fundamental right but a statutory right. "The right to establish an educational institution is a statutory right and not a fundamental right under Article The Supreme Court has observed that a private educational institution cannot be said to be an instrumentality of the State for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that a private educational institution is not an instrumentality of the State. "A private educational institution cannot be said to... A private educational institution cannot The court said that the private colleges are the "felt necessities of time" and that the private sector should be involved and encouraged to augment the much-needed resources in the field of education thereby making as much progress as possible to achieve the constitutional goals in this respect. However, a word of caution was required to be uttered that not all the private institutions belonged to this category. There were institutions which had attained great reputation by The Supreme Court has observed that it is not possible to hold that education must be available on a charitable basis.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that it cannot be contended that profiteering is an evil and if a public utility like electricity could be controlled, certainly, the professional colleges should also be regulated.The bench was dealing with a The Supreme Court has observed that the right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the right to education is guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution. "The right to education is a fundamental right. It is guaranteed under Article 21-A of In the case of medical colleges, 80% of the seats are to be filled up by the Government nominees and the remaining 20% by the management at its discretion, the court said. The court was hearing a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 3-A of the Andhra Pradesh Private Medical and Dental Colleges (Regulation of Admission) Act, The Supreme Court has observed that the right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the right to education is guaranteed under Article 21 and Article 21A of the Constitution of India. "The right to education is guaranteed under Articles 21 and Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees the right to life and personal liberty to all citizens of India. The right to education is an integral part of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution of India. Article 21A was inserted by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act, 200 The Supreme Court observed that the right to education is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. "The right to education flows from the right to life guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to life includes the right to live with human dignity. The right to education is an integral part of the right to live with human dignity," the bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao The Supreme Court has observed that the right to establish an educational institution arises by necessary implication from Articles 19(1) (g) and 30 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and BV Nagarathna observed that the right to establish and administer an educational Institution (by a member of the minority community, religion or linguistic The Supreme Court observed that imparting education cannot be allowed to become commerce. "Education in its true spirit is more a mission and a vocation rather than a profession or a trade or business, however wide may be the denotations of the two latter words", the bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed.The bench was dealing with a batch It is the discretion in the management that has mainly led to the commercialization of education. It is the discretion that is at the root of the several ills complained of." The Court further observed that the scheme evolved herewith is in the nature of guidelines, which the appropriate Governments and recognizing and affiliating authorities shall impose, in addition to such other conditions, as they may think appropriate, as conditions for grant of permission The Supreme Court has held that private unaided engineering colleges in Andhra Pradesh are not entitled to admit students to 50% of the seats in their own discretion, irrespective of merit.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that Section 3-A of the Andhra Pradesh Education Institutions (Regulation of The admission of students and the charging of fees in these private educational institutions shall be in accordance with the scheme evolved herein-set out in Part-III of this Judgment. A citizen of this country has a right to establish an educational institution, but no citizen, person, or institution has a right, much less a fundamental right, to recognition or affiliation or grant-in-aid from the state. The recognition and/or