Further, the Court directed the Election Commission of India to secure to the voters the following information pertaining to the candidates contesting the election to the Parliament and the State Legislative Assemblies and the parties they represent: (1) Whether the candidate is accused of any offense punishable with imprisonment? (2) Assets possessed by the candidate, his or her spouse, and dependant relations? (3) Facts giving insight to the candidate's competence, capacity, and suitability for acting as a parliamentarian or legislator, including details of his or her educational qualifications. (4) Information which the Election Commission considers necessary for judging the candidate's capacity and capability for acting as a parliamentarian or a legislator, including the details of his or her criminal background. The Court also directed the Election Commission to disseminate the afo The Supreme Court observed that the Election Commission of India (ECI) is empowered to issue directions for disclosure of assets, educational qualification and involvement in criminal cases of a candidate contesting elections.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the Election Commission has the power to issue such directions under Article 324 of the Constitution of India. "The Election Commission of India is empowered to issue directions for the disclosure of assets, educational qualifications and involvement in criminal cases of candidates contesting elections. The Election Commission has the power under Article 324 to issue such directions. The Election Commission is not bound by the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the Representation of the People Rules, 1961. The Supreme Court has observed that the right to know about the candidates who are contesting elections is derived from the concept of "freedom of speech and expression" under Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the freedom of speech and expression includes the right to impart and receive information, which includes the right to hold opinions. "Freedom of speech and expression includes right to receive and impart information which includes right to hold opinions. The right to know which is derived from concept of freedom of speech and expression, though not absolute, is a factor that should make one wary when secrecy is claimed for transactions that can at any rate have no repercussions on public security. The purpose of the press is to advance public interest by publishing The Supreme Court has directed the Election Commission of India (ECI) to call for information on an affidavit from each candidate seeking election to the Parliament or a State Legislature, furnishing therein information on the following aspects: (1) Whether the candidate has been convicted/acquitted/discharged in any criminal offence in the past? (2) Whether the candidate is an accused in any pending case of any offence punishable by imprisonment for two years or more and in which charge has been framed or cognizance has been taken by the Court of law? (3) The assets of a candidate and of his spouse and that of dependents. (4) Liabilities, particularly whether there are any over-dues of any public financial institution or government dues. (5) Educational qualifications of the candidate. The Supreme Court has