The Court was hearing a plea filed by Pinki Virani, a journalist, on behalf of Aruna Shanbaug, who was sexually assaulted in 1973 and has been in a persistent vegetative state ever since. The plea had sought a direction to the respondents to stop feeding Aruna and let her die peacefully. The Court had appointed a three-member medical board to examine Aruna and submit a report. The board submitted its report on February 3, 2011. The report stated that Aruna was in a persistent vegetative Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug died on May 27, 2017, at the age of 72. She had been in a vegetative state since 1982, when she was attacked by a nurse, Sohanlal Bhartha Walmiki, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1989. In 2011, the Supreme Court appointed a three-member medical board to examine her condition. The board concluded that she was in a permanent vegetative state. In 2014 The Supreme Court has observed that the right to die with dignity is an integral part of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.A bench comprising Justices DY Chandrachud and MR Shah observed that the right to life includes the right to die with dignity. "The right to die with dignity is integral to the right to life guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The right to life includes the right to live with human dignity and the right to die with dignity. The right to die with dignity is an inseparable part of the The Supreme Court observed that passive euthanasia is legal in India even without legislation provided certain safeguards are maintained.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and Surya Kant observed that passive euthanasia, which entails the withholding of medical treatment for the continuance of life, is legal in India even without legislation, provided certain safeguards are maintained."The general legal position all over the world is that while active euthanasia (taking specific steps to cause a patient's death) is illegal, unless there is legislation permitting it The Supreme Court has held that passive euthanasia is not illegal in India. The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and Surya Kant observed that passive euthanasia is permissible in the country if it is carried out in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Medical Council of India (MCI) in 2018. "Passive euthanasia is not an offence under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force," the court said. The court was dealing with a plea filed by the family of In the case of Aruna Shanbaug v. Union of India (2011) 10 SCC 756, the Apex Court held that the right to die with dignity is a facet of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In the case of Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303, the Apex Court observed that the right to live with human dignity is an inalienable part of the right to life guaranteed The Supreme Court has observed that it is ultimately for the Court to decide as parens patriae as to what is in the best interests of a patient who is in a persistent vegetative state, though the wishes of the close relatives and next friend, and the opinion of medical practitioners, should be given due weight.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed: "It is ultimately for the court to decide as parens... The Supreme Court has observed that it is "ultimately for the Court to decide The Supreme Court has observed that a person is dead when his/her brain is dead. The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and MR Shah observed that the most important organ of the human body is the brain, which cannot be replaced. "This is probably because brain cells cannot multiply after the early childhood years, unlike other cells like skin cells which are regularly dying and are being replaced by new cells produced by the multiplying of the old cells. Hence, if the brain cells die, they cannot be replaced. If the brain is dead, a person is said to be dead The Supreme Court has held that a decision to withdraw life support of a patient in permanent vegetative state (PVS) has to be taken by the High Court concerned and not by the patient's relatives or doctors or next friend.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and MR Shah observed that the decision to withdraw life support of a person in PVS should be taken by the High Court concerned as parens patriae. "In our opinion, if we leave it to the patient's relatives, doctors, or next friend to decide whether to discontinue the life support The Supreme Court has laid down a procedure to be adopted by the High Court when an application is filed by the near relatives or next friends or the doctors/hospital staff for permission to withdraw the life support of an incompetent person.The bench of Justices Gyan Sudha Mishra and R. Banumathi said that when such an application is filed, the Chief Justice of the High Court shall forthwith constitute a bench of at least two judges who shall decide to grant approval or not.Before doing so, the bench should seek the opinion of the committee of three reput