The Court was hearing a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of the notification issued by the Governor of Bihar on May 23, 2005, ordering the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly. The notification was issued on the ground that attempts were being made to cobble together a majority by illegal means and lay a claim to form the government in the state. The Court was hearing the petitions through video-conferencing The Court was hearing a batch of petitions challenging the dissolution of the Bihar Legislative Assembly in May 2005 by then President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam on the advice of then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. The petitions were filed by Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), Rashtriya Janta Dal (RJD) and Janata The Supreme Court has held that a State Legislative Assembly can be dissolved by the Governor under Article 174 (2) (b) of the Constitution even before its first meeting takes place.A Constitution Bench comprising Justices A.M. Khanwilkar, Dinesh Maheshwari, Sanjiv Khanna, B.V. Nagarathna and Bela M. Trivedi observed that there is The Supreme Court has observed that the role of the Governor is indispensible for the successful working of the constitutional scheme of governance and that most of the safeguards are such as cannot be reduced to a precise set of rules of procedure or practice.The bench of Justices A M Khanwilkar, Dinesh Maheshwari and CT Ravikumar was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the dissolution of the B The Supreme Court has observed that the Governor of a State is not expected to be a mere rubber stamp of the Council of Ministers. "The Governor is not expected to be a rubber stamp of the council of ministers. The Governor is not expected to be a mere post office. The Governor is expected to be a sentinel of the Constitution. The Governor is expected to be the guardian of the Constitution. The Governor is... The Governor is expected to The Supreme Court has held that the Governor of a State cannot dissolve the State Legislative Assembly on the ground that the Government cannot be carried on in the State in accordance with the Constitution of India.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that the power under Article 356 of the Constitution of India cannot be exercised by the The Supreme Court has observed that the power of the President under Article 74(2) of the Constitution to seek advice of the Council of Ministers on the exercise of the functions of the President under Article 77(1) is subject to the provisions of Article 74(1) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that Article The Supreme Court has held that the satisfaction of the President of India under Article 356 of the Constitution is judicially reviewable.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that the satisfaction of the President is judicially reviewable in terms of the law laid down in Bommai case (1994). The Supreme Court has observed that there cannot be any presumption of 'allurement' or 'horse-trading' only for the reason that some legislators expressed the view which was opposed to their public posture and decided to support the formation of a government by a leader of another political party.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that minority governments are not unknown The Supreme Court has observed that the failure of Constitutional machinery of the government is not confined to loss of majority by a Ministry in the House. It may be due to several reasons. Therefore, if a meeting of the Legislature is contemplated as a mandatory requirement before a report of the Governor for action under Article 356, and floor test is impliedly made the sole and exclusive method to judge the stability of the Ministry, the Tenth Schedule The Supreme Court has held that the Governor of a State has no power to recommend dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly on the ground that the majority staking a claim to form the Government has been obtained by offering allurement and bribe to the elected members of the Legislative Assembly.A Constitution Bench of Justices A.M. Khanwilkar, Dinesh Maheshwari,... The Supreme Court has held that the Governor The Supreme Court has held that the Governor's decision to recommend dissolution of the Bihar Legislative Assembly in 2005 was wholly illegal and unconstitutional as it was based on extraneous and irrelevant considerations.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the Governor's decision to dissolve the Bihar Assembly in 20 The Supreme Court has held that the immunity granted to the Governor under Article 361 of the Constitution of India does not mean that the grounds of mala fides or being ultra vires will not be examined by the Court.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and MR Shah observed that the expression "purported to be done" in Article 361 of Constitution does not cover the acts which are mala fide The Supreme Court has observed that the Governor of a State is not a mute spectator when the democratic process is tampered by unfair means.The bench of Justices Arijit Pasayat and Ashok H. Ganguly observed that when the foundation for the claim is tainted, the obvious inference is that it will not lead to a stable government. "The effort is to grab power at any cost, even by apparent unfair and t It is submitted that the reports of the Governor dated 6th March 2005, 21st May 2005 and 27th April 2005 do not reflect the correct position in law and that the President's Notification dated 7th March 2005 does not suffer from any infirmity. It is further submitted that the President's Proclamation dated 7th March The Supreme Court has observed that the scope of judicial review in the matter of exercise of power under Article 356 is limited to the deficiency in the decision-making process and not in the decision itself. "The scope of judicial review in the matters of exercise of power under Article-356 is limited to deficiency in the decision making process and not in the decision itself", the bench of Justices... The Supreme Court has observed that The Supreme Court has observed that the scope of judicial review in respect of a proclamation issued under Article 356 of the Constitution is not the same as that of other administrative orders.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that a limited judicial review is available to the courts against the proclamation issued under Article... The Supreme Court has observed that the scope In the instant case, the opinion of the Governor was that if foul means were adopted to cobble the majority, it would be against the spirit of the democracy. Stand of the petitioners was that even if it was accepted to be correct, there was no constitutional provision empowering the governor to make the same as basis for not allowing the claim to be staked. The argument did not appear to be totally sound. In the report dated 21.0 The Governor of a State should be appointed only by the President after consulting the Chief Minister of the State. Normally, the five-year term should be adhered to, and removal or transfer should be done by following a similar procedure as for the appointment i.e. after consulting the Chief Minister of the concerned State." The Court also referred to the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) which recommended that the powers of the (Para 8.19.5.) 8.19.5 The Commission recommends that before issuing the proclamation under article 356, the concerned state should be given an opportunity to explain their position and redress the situation unless the situation is such that following the above course of action would not be in the interest of the security of the state, or the defence of the country, or other reasons necessitating urgent action The Governor shall be aided and advised by the Council of Ministers in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he may, under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force, be required to exercise his functions in his discretion. The Governor shall not be bound by any advice tendered to him by the Council of Ministers. The Governor shall have the right to seek the opinion of the Council of Ministers on any matter The Governor shall act on the advice of the Council of Ministers except in so far as he is by this Constitution required to act in his discretion. The Governor shall not be a member of any legislature or legislative body, or hold any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority within the territory of India or under any foreign Government. The Governor shall not be ineligible for re- The Honourable Dr.B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not think it is necessary to go into the question as to whether the Governor should have discretionary powers or not. I do not think it is necessary for me to go into the question as to why the Governor should or should not have discretionary powers. I do not think that it is necessary for me to say that the Governor should not have discretionary powers The Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 was enacted by the Parliament of India in 1978 to amend the Constitution of India. It was introduced in the Lok Sabha by Prime Minister Morarji Desai on 19 July 1978 and was passed by the Lok Sabha on 20 July 1978 and by the Raj "I submit that the deletion of this Article is a very important and serious departure in our original decisions and the Draft Constitution and our original amendments. We took important decisions in this house as to the principles of the constitution and we adopted definite principles and resolutions and the draft constitution was prepared in accordance with them. Not only the draft constitution has been given up but the official amendments submitted by members of the house within the prescribed period The President may, if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of a State cannot be carried on according to the provisions of the Constitution, issue a Proclamation directing that all or any of the powers of the State to be exercised by or under the authority of the President or any person appointed by him with such exceptions and modifications and from such date as he may specify in the Proclamation. The Proclamation shall ce Article 356 of the Constitution of India deals with the imposition of President's Rule in a State. It reads as follows: "356. (1) Where the President, on receipt of report from the Governor of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in the State, whereby the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance With the provisions of this Constitution, the President may assume to himself all or The Supreme Court has observed that there is no provision in the Constitution which stipulates that the Legislative Assembly can only be dissolved after the first meeting of the House.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that once by operation of the Representation of People Act, 1951, the House or Assembly is deemed to The Court noted that the Governor had recommended dissolution of the Assembly on the ground that the majority projected was based on unethical and corrupt means and such action is not constitutional. The Court observed that it may be a wrong perception of Governor, but it is his duty to prevent the installation of a Cabinet where majority has been cobbled in such a manner. It may be a wrong perception, it may be an erroneous approach, but it is certainly The Supreme Court has observed that the power of judicial review cannot be exercised when a proclamation is issued under Article 356 of Constitution on the ground of mala fide or on the ground of wholly extraneous or irrelevant grounds.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari made the observation while dismissing a plea challenging the dissolution of Bih The Supreme Court has observed that the power conferred on the President to dissolve the State Legislative Assembly under Article 174 (2) (b) of the Constitution is not absolute and it has got checks and balances and the court can certainly go into the materials placed before the Governor which led to the decision to dissolve the Assembly.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR... The Supreme Court has observed that It is important to note that the Writ Petitioners have no case that JDU or any other alliance had acquired a majority and that they had approached the governor staking their claim for forming a government. No material is placed before the court to show that the JDU or its alliance with the BJP had ever met the governor praying that they had the right to form a government. No materials have been placed before the court to show that they had,