The contention of the petitioners was that these rules discriminate against women by providing inter alia that so far as succession to immovable property is concerned, a widow or a mother becoming entitled under Sections 16, 17, 21 and 22 would have only a life interest terminable at death or remarriage and that a daughter would not be entitled to succession to the property of an intestate in the same shares as a son but that she would be entitled to one-fourth of the value of the share of a son or Rs.5,000 whichever is less, and even to this amount she would not be entitled on intestacy if streedhanom was provided or promised by the intestate to her or in the lifetime of the intestate, by his or her heirs or on the death of such wife or husband by his or her heirs. The petitioners contended that these rules were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and hence unconstitutional and void. The petitioners also contended that after the coming into force of Part B States (Law) Act 1951, the Travancore Christian succession Act 1925 continued to govern intestate succession of the property of a member of Indian Christian community in the territories originally forming the State of Travancore. The petitioners contended that Sections 24, 28, and 29 of that Act were unconstitutional and void as they violated Article 14 of the Constitution. The petitioners contended that after the extension of Indian Succession Act 1951 to the territories of the former state of Travancore, the provisions of Chapter II of Part V of the Indian Succession Act would be applicable equally to the Indian Christians in the territories of former state of Travancore. However, the respondents contended that Section 29(2) of the Indian It was contended on behalf of the respondents that by virtue of Section 29 Sub-Section (2) of Indian Succession Act, the Indian Succession Act must be deemed to have adopted all laws relating to intestate succession, including the Travancore Christian Act, 1925 so far as Indian Christians are concerned. This contention was supported by reference to the decision of Travancore Cochin High Court in Kuriyan Augusty v Devassy Aley. However, the court rejected this contention and held that on the coming into force of Part-B States (Laws) Act, the Travancore Christian Act 1925 stood repealed and Chapter II of Part V of the Indian Succession Act became applicable. On this view, it became unnecessary to consider the validity of Sections 24, 28, and 29 of Travancore Christian Act. Accordingly, the court allowed the writ petitions and declared that intestate succession to property of Indian Christians is governed by the provisions contained in Chapter II of Part V of Indian Succession Act. Case Title: K.P. Joseph v. State of Kerala & Ors. Case No. : W.P. (C) No. 1083 of 2019 Date of Order: 18-01-2022 Appearance: Advocate K.P. Joseph for petitioner; Advocate K.V. Prasad for respondents. Counsel for Petitioner: K.P. Joseph Counsel for Respondent: K.V. Prasad Case title: K.P. JOSEPH v. STATE OF KERALA & ORS. [WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 1083 OF 2019] Date of Order: 18TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2022 Appearance: ADVOCATE K