The Supreme Court observed that the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution includes the right to move freely throughout the territory of India and the right to reside and settle in any part of the country.The bench of Justices M.R. Shah and B.V. Nagarathna observed that the right to personal liberty under Article 21 includes the right to move freely throughout... The Supreme Court observed that the right to The Supreme Court has observed that the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution is not confined to the right of a person to move freely from one place to another within the territory of India, but extends to the right of a person to leave India and return to India.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed: "The right to personal liberty The Supreme Court has observed that the right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.In this case, the petitioner's passport had been impounded on the ground that her presence was required in connection with the proceedings before the Commission of Inquiry. However, the reasons for impounding the petitioner's passport were not disclosed to her.The Supreme Court The Supreme Court has observed that the right to go abroad is not an integral part of the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 10(1)(a) of the Indian Constitution.The bench of Justice PN Bhagwati and Justice MH Kania observed that the right to go abroad and the right to free speech and expression are made up of "basically different constituents", so different that one cannot be comprehended The Supreme Court observed that the right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "The right to travel abroad is a facet of the right to personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court observed that a law depriving a person of "personal liberty" and prescribing a procedure for the same under Article 21 of the Constitution has to stand the test of Article 19, which may be applicable in a given situation, and ex hypothesi, it must also be liable to be tested with regard to Article 14.The bench of Justices MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed: "The law The Supreme Court observed that the rules of natural justice are applicable to administrative proceedings as well as quasi-judicial proceedings.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed: "The rules of natural justice are applicable to both administrative proceedings as well as quasi- judicial proceedings. There is no distinction between the two for the purpose of the applicability of the rules of natural justice. The Supreme Court has held that the Passport Authority is required to record in writing the reasons for impounding a passport and furnish a copy of the same to the passport holder.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed that the Passport Authority is required by Section 10(5) of the Passport Act, 1967 to record the reasons for impounding The Supreme Court has observed that the object and form of State action alone do not determine the extent of protection that can be claimed by an individual and that it is the effect of the State action upon the fundamental right of the individual that attracts the jurisdiction of the court to grant relief.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the The Supreme Court has observed that the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by the Constitution is exercisable not only within the territory of India but also outside.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "The right to freedom of speech and expression is not confined to the territory of India. It is exercisable not It was argued that the right to go abroad is an essential part of the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution. It was further contended that the right to go abroad is a peripheral right arising out of the freedom of speech and expression and is therefore covered by Article 19 (1)(a) of the Constitution. The petitioner relied on the decision of the US Supreme The Supreme Court observed that the right to travel abroad is not a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution of India. "The right to travel abroad is not a guaranteed right under Article 19(1). The right to travel abroad is at the periphery of the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India. The right to travel abroad is not a It was argued that the impugned order was violative of the petitioner's right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) and her right to carry on her profession guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution. It was also contended that the impugned order was ultra vires Section 10 (3) (c) of the Passports Act, The Supreme Court observed that the right to travel abroad is a facet of the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. "The right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It is a facet of personal liberty. The right to travel abroad is a basic human right which is recognised in Article 13 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights The Supreme Court has observed that the right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna said that the right to travel abroad is a facet of the right to personal liberty which is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21. "The right to travel abroad is an integral... The Supreme Court has observed that the right The Supreme Court observed that the right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to life and personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian said that the right to travel abroad is a facet of the right to personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India The Court also observed that the right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution of India. "The right to travel abroad is an integral component of the right to freedom of speech guaranteed by Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India. The right to travel abroad is an inseparable part of the right to freedom of expression guaranteed The Supreme Court has observed that the right to travel abroad is a facet of the right to freedom of movement guaranteed under Article 19(1)(d) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed, "The right to travel abroad is an integral part of the right to freedom of movement which is a facet of the right guaranteed under Article The Supreme Court has observed that the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution are available not only within the territory of India, but also outside the territory of India.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed: "The fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of our Constitution are available not only within the territorial limits of India, but also outside the territorial limits of India. The fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 14 The Supreme Court has observed that the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution of India are not available outside the territory of India.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed that a citizen cannot enforce his fundamental rights outside the territory of India, even if it is taken that the rights are available outside the country.The bench was dealing with an appeal filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) challenging The Supreme Court has observed that the right to life and personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India cannot be taken away by the State except in accordance with procedure established by law.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed, "The right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 cannot be taken away by the State, except in accordance with procedure The Supreme Court has observed that the decision in the Bank Nationalisation Case is not an authority for the proposition that an act of the legislature under Article 21 of the Constitution must also satisfy the other fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that the decision in the Bank The Supreme Court has held that the pith and substance rule is not relevant in determining the validity of a law under Article 21 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to life and personal liberty.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the pith and substance rule, which is relevant in determining legislative competence, is not relevant in determining the The Supreme Court observed that the right to travel abroad is a part of personal liberty of which a citizen cannot be deprived except in accordance with procedure established by law. "The right to travel abroad is part of personal liberty of which a person cannot be deprived except according to the procedure established by law," the bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed. "The right to The Supreme Court has held that a person whose passport has been impounded under Section 10 (3) (c) of the Passports Act, 1967, has a right to be heard by the Passport Authority before a final order is passed.Section 10(3) empowers the Passport Authority to impound a passport if it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interests of In such cases, it should be borne in mind, that when the Government itself passes an order, it should be presumed, that it would have made the order, after careful scrutiny. If an Order is passed by the Passport Authority, an appeal is provided for. If the Government passes an Order, though no appeal is provided, but, as the power is vested, in the highest authority, the Section is not unconstitutional.