The appellant was convicted by the trial court under Sections 302, 201 and 498A of the Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to death for the murder of Shakereh, life imprisonment for causing disappearance of evidence and five years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000 for the offence under Section 498A of the IPC. The High Court upheld the conviction and the death sentence awarded by the trial court. Aggrieved by the same, the appellant approached the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has reiterated that the death penalty should be awarded only in the rarest of rare cases.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the death penalty should be awarded in the rarest of rare cases where the crime is so heinous and brutal that the collective conscience of the society is so shocked that it would expect the holding of the judicial officers to inflict death sentence irrespective of their personal opinion on desirability or otherwise of the death penalty.The bench was dealing with an appeal filed by the State of The Supreme Court observed that the sentence of life imprisonment, awarded as a substitute for death penalty, should be carried out strictly as directed by Court so that it may be followed as a uniform policy not only by the Apex Court but also by High Courts, being the superior courts in their respective States.A suggestion to this effect was made by the Supreme Court nearly 30 years ago in Dalbir Singh v. State of Punjab (1979) 2 SCC 1058.In paragraph 14 of the judgment, the Supreme Court had held and observed as follows: " The Supreme Court has observed that a convict undergoing a life imprisonment has a right to claim remission.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari made the observation while dismissing an appeal filed by the State of Maharashtra against the Bombay High Court's order granting remission to a convict who was sentenced to life imprisonment.The bench observed: "A convict undergoing life imprisonment does have a right to claim remission. However, it is for the appropriate government to decide whether to grant remission The Supreme Court has observed that life convicts are granted remissions and released from prison on completing the 14-year term without any sound legal basis.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed that the deemed conversion of life imprisonment into 20 years by executive orders issued by the state governments apparently flies in the face of the long line of decisions by the Supreme Court. "It is thus to be seen that life-convicts are granted remissions and are released from prison on completing the fourteen-year-term without any sound legal basis. The deemed conversion of life Further, the formalisation of the special category of sentence shall have the great advantage of having death penalty on the statute book, but to actually use it only in the rarest of rare cases. This would be a reassertion of the Bachan Singh case besides being in accord with modern trends in penology. The Court also noted that the matter may be looked at from a different angle. The issue of sentencings has two aspects. A sentence may either be excessive and unduly harsh or highly disproportionately low. When an appellant comes to the Apex Court carrying a death sentence awarded