The Supreme Court has observed that lawyers have no right to go on strike or to give a call for boycott of court proceedings.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed that lawyers are officers of the court and are obliged to aid and assist in the dispensation of justice and abstention from work impairs the administration of justice and is thus inconsistent with their calling and position.The bench observed that abstention from work may be resorted to in rarest of rare cases where the action protested is detrimental to the free and fair administration The Delhi High Court has reiterated that lawyers have no right to go on strike and abstain from appearing in court in cases in which they hold a vakalat for the parties even if it is in compliance with a decision of any Association or body of lawyers.Justice Chandra Dhari Singh observed that lawyers have no right to strike and abstain from appearing before the court in cases in which they hold the vakalat for the parties. "Lawyers have no right to go on strike. Lawyers have no right to boycott the court. Lawyers have no right to ab The Supreme Court has observed that it is the duty of every advocate who has accepted a brief to attend trials, even though it may go on for a prolonged period. "It is the duty of every advocate who accepts a brief to attend trials, even if it goes on for a prolonged period. It is the duty of every advocate to boldly ignore a call for a strike or boycott. It is the duty of the Bar Councils to ensure there is no unprofessional or unbecoming conduct. The Bar Councils and even the Bar Associations can never consider giving a call for a strike The Bar Council of India has been directed by the Supreme Court to incorporate clauses in their disciplinary rules as suggested in the interim Order of the Court in their disciplinary rules.The Supreme Court has made it clear that lawyers have no right to strike or give a call for a boycott, not even a token strike.The protest, if any, is required by giving press statements, TV interviews, carrying out the Court premises banners and placards, wearing black or white arm bands, peaceful protest marches, going on dharnas, relay facts etc.It has been held that lawyers holding Vak Further, it had been repeatedly held that strikes are an attempt to interfere with administration of justice. It is no doubt true that judiciary is overburdened with pending litigation and if strikes are resorted to on one ground or the other, the litigants would suffer as the cases would not be decided for years. Therefore, some concrete joint actions are required to be taken by the bench and the bar to see that there are no strikes anymore. For this purpose, the suggestion made by the Bar council of India in its resolution dated September 29, 2002 requires to