The Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment Act), 1964 was challenged on the ground that it infringed Articles 14, 19(1) (f) and (g) and 31 of the Constitution. The petitioners contended that the said amendment was ultra vires Articles 368 and 13(2 The Supreme Court observed that the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution are not amenable to amendment under Article 368 of the Constitution, which deals with the procedure for amendment of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that The Constitution confers on the Parliament the power to amend the Constitution by way of an amending law. The amending law is a law within the meaning of Article 13(2). The amending law is a law made by the legislative process. Therefore, the amending law is a law made in terms of Article 368 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court observed that the power to amend the Constitution is a sovereign power and that the amending body is supreme to the legislative body. "The power to amend the constitution is a sovereign power and the amending body is sovereign to the legislative body. The power to amend the constitution is supreme to the legislative process. The amending The Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 2021 was challenged on the ground that it violated the fundamental right to property guaranteed under Article 300-A of the Constitution. The petitioners also contended that the amendment was violative of Article 368 of the Constitution which deals with the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution. The Supreme Court has held that the Parliament cannot amend the Constitution in such a way that it takes away or abridges any of the fundamental rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.In a landmark judgment, a five-judge bench of Justices KM Joseph, S Abdul Nazeer, BR Gavai, PS Narasimha and The Supreme Court has held that the power to amend the Constitution under Article 368 does not include the power to take away or abridge any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.A Constitution Bench of Justices KM Joseph, S Abdul Nazeer, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V Ramasubraman The Supreme Court observed that there is no express limitation on the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368 of the Constitution of India.The bench of Justices S. Abdul Nazeer, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna, V. Ramasubramanian and BV Nagarathna observed that the power to amend the The Constitution is the fundamental law, and no law made under mere legislative power can affect any change in the Constitution, unless there is an express power given in the Constitution to that effect. But subject to such express power, given by the Constitution itself, the fundamental law, namely, the Constitution, cannot be changed by law passed under the mere legislative provisions contained in the Constitution, as The Supreme Court has observed that the power to amend the Constitution under Article 368 of the Constitution of India is plenary in nature and there are no implied limitations on the same.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that the power to am The Court held that the power to amend was found in Article 368 and was not to be found in Article 248 read with Item 97 of List I. Thus, an amendment of the Constitution was not an ordinary law made under the legislative power and could not be subject to Article 13(2) which when it talks of the State The Supreme Court has held that the power of amendment conferred by Article 368 of the Constitution is unfettered and there is no implied limitation on the power of Parliament to amend any of the provisions of the Constitution, including the entrenched Articles.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bop The majority in that case was not in favour of reviewing the decision, even so, in view of the arguments raised and the importance of the question, it considered the arguments against the case and came to the conclusion itself that the case was rightly decided. "We would follow the decision in Sankar Prasad's case [Sankari Prasad v. Union The Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment Act), 1964 was challenged on the ground that it violated the basic structure of the Constitution. The Court held that the Seventeenth Amendment Act did not violate the basic structure of the Constitution. However, the Court held that the Seventh Amendment Act, 1962 and the Punjab Security The State is the sum total of all agencies which are also individually mentioned in Article 12 and by the definition, all the parts severally are included in the prohibition. The definition of the State in Article 12 reads: "12. In this part, unless the context otherwise requires, 'the State' includes the Government and Parliament of India, and the Government and It is obvious that the Constituent assembly in making the fundamental rights justiciable was not satisfied with the reliance on the sense of self restraint or public opinion (Sir. Robert Peel calls it that great compound of folly weakness, prejudice wrong feeling, right feeling obstinacy and newspaper paragraphs). This is not an argument of fear, the question to ask is The majority in Sajjan Singh’s case (1965) 1 SCR 933 suggested bringing Article 32 under the proviso to improve protection to Fundamental Rights. However, the Court observed that Article 32 did not stand in need of this protection to abridge or take away Fundamental Rights. To bring into existence a constitu It was then that the State began to recognise the rights of the individual in his dealings with the state. It was Cicero who first declared that the primary duty of the governor of a state was to secure to each individual in possession of his property. Here, we may see the recognition of ownership of property as a fundamental right. This idea was so ingrained in early The Constitution (Forty-First Amendment) Act, 2005 was passed to amend Articles 31A and 31B of the Constitution of India. Article 31A was inserted by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act 1951. Article 31B was inserted by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment The Supreme Court observed that the right to property guaranteed under Article 300A of the Constitution of India is not absolute and can be taken away by the State in public interest.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "The right to property guaranteed under The Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act 1978 was challenged on the ground that it violated the basic structure of the Constitution. The Constitution (Forty-Fifth Amendment) Act 2002 was challenged on the ground that it was in violation of the basic structure of the Constitution.The Constitution (Forty It is because the power to amend the Constitution is given by Article 368 that the Constitution stands amended. If the procedure of Article 368 is followed, then the Constitution shall stand amended. The proviso is introduced on the assumption that some articles are amendable under the easy procedure of the main part of Article 368. The object of The Supreme Court observed that the Constitution makers did not intend that the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution could not be amended for giving effect to the directive principles of state policy contained in Part IV of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubram The Constitution is meant to endure. (Para 298) The contention that the parliament may provide for another constituent assembly by amending the constitution and that assembly can amend part III and take away or abridge fundamental rights is not tenable. (Para 299) A constitutional amendment that does not profess to amend Article 22 It is said that the Acts were still-born and could not be validated. However, by force of Article 31B, the Acts were deemed never to have become void and had to be regarded as valid from the inception. The petitioners argued that Article 31B amended Article 141 as it altered the law declared by this Court on The Supreme Court has observed that the amending power under Article 368 of the Constitution is plenary and Parliament can amend any part of the Constitution including the Fundamental Rights conferred by Part III.The Constitution Bench of Justices S. Abdul Nazeer, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna, V. Ramasubramanian It was argued that the power of amendment under Article 368 is to be found in Articles 246 & 248 of the Constitution, read with Item 97 of List 1 of the 7th Schedule. It was contended that the power of law-making in these Articles is "subject to the provisions" of the Constitution. The Supreme Court has observed that there is no implied limitation on the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368. "There is no implied limitation on the amending power of Parliament under Article 368 of the Constitution of India. The amending power is plenary and Parliament can amend any provision of the Constitution including the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part The Supreme Court has observed that the principle of stare decisis cannot be applied to a decision on a constitutional point and that there is no restriction in the Constitution which prevents the Apex Court from reviewing its earlier decisions.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging