The Supreme Court observed that the involuntary administration of narcoanalysis, polygraph examination, and brain electrical activation profile (BEAP) test for the purposes of improving investigation efforts in criminal cases violates the right against self-incrimination enshrined in Article 20 (3) of the Constitution.A bench comprising Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed that the right against self- incrimination under Article 20 The Supreme Court of the United States in Daubert v. Merrel Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993) held that the "general acceptance" standard articulated in Frye v. United States, 290 F. 10 The Supreme Court of Canada in R v Beland (1987) 36 CCC (3rd) 481 held that polygraph test results are inadmissible as evidence. The Court observed that the admission of polygraph evidence would offend some well-established rules of evidence such as the rule against oath-helping, the rule against admission of past or out of court statements by a witness, and the restrictions on producing character evidence. The The Court noted that the use of the 'Scopolamine technique' led to the coining of the term 'truth serum' and that with the passage of time, the use of sodium amytal injections came to be used for inducing persons to talk freely, primarily in the fields of psychiatry. The Court also noted that the use of the 'narcoanalysis technique' has been revived in recent years, with demands for its use on persons suspected of involvement in The Supreme Court of New Jersey had upheld the trial court’s decision to exclude the psychiatrist’s testimony in the guilt phase. The Supreme Court of Canada had held that statements made in a hypnotic state were not voluntary and hence, they cannot be admitted as evidence. The Court had also decided that if the post-hypnotic statements related back to the contents of what had been said during the hypnosis, the subsequent statements would also be inadmissible. The Supreme Court has observed that the use of polygraph, narcoanalysis and brain electrical activation profile (BEAP) tests in criminal investigations is unconstitutional and violative of the right to privacy.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed that the use of such tests in criminal investigations violates Articles 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution. "We are of the view that the use of In the present case, the petitioner has been subjected to custodial interrogation for more than 100 days. The petitioner has been interrogated for more than 200 hours. The petitioner has been subjected to 3 polygraph tests. The petitioner has also been subjected to a narco analysis test. The petitioner has also been administered a lie detector test. The petitioner has also undergone a brain mapping test. The petition The Supreme Court observed that the right against self-incriminating statements under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India is not confined to the trial stage but extends to the stage of investigation as well.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed: "The right against self-incrimination under Article 20(3), in our view, is not confined to the stage of trial but extends to the stage The Supreme Court observed that the right against self-incrimination under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India is not available to persons who are examined in proceedings that are not governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed that the extension of the right against self- incrimination to suspects and witnesses has its... The Supreme Court observed that the 'right against self The Supreme Court has held that statements made by a person in police custody are admissible in evidence under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, if the same are not extracted through compulsion.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that Section 27 permits the 'derivative use' of custodial statements, i.e. when information revealed in custody leads to the discovery The Supreme Court has held that the compulsory administration of narcoanalysis, polygraph examination and brain electrical activity mapping (BEAP) tests violates the right against self- incrimination guaranteed under Article 20 (3) of the Constitution.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari held that the results obtained from these tests amount to "testimonial compulsion", thereby triggering the protection of The Supreme Court observed that the right against self-incrimination under Article 20 (3) of the Constitution of India is not violated when a person is compelled to undergo a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether he has committed an offence or not.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the right against self- incrimination under Article 20... The Supreme Court The Supreme Court has held that the results of the narcoanalysis test, polygraph examination and the brain electrical activity mapping (BEAP) test cannot be used as testimonial evidence against an accused in a criminal trial.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai said that the results of these tests cannot be used against an accused in a criminal trial as they violate the right against self-incrimination guaranteed under Article 20(3) The Supreme Court has held that the results obtained through the polygraph examination and the Brain Electrical Activity Mapping (BEAP) test should be treated as 'personal testimony', which attracts the protective shield of the right against self- incrimination under Article 20(3) of the Constitution.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the results obtained from these tests are a means for The Supreme Court has observed that the right against self-incrimination under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India is not applicable when a person gives her/his informed consent to undergo any one of the impugned tests.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the right against self incrimination under Article 20 (3) of the Constitution is not applicable when The Supreme Court has held that the right to privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution is not absolute and can be curtailed if it is done in light of competing interests.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed that the right to privacy is not an absolute right and can be curtailed in the interest of public order, morality, health or other compelling state interests The Supreme Court has held that subjecting a person to the techniques of narcoanalysis, polygraph examination and brain electro-stimulation (BEAP) test amounts to "cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment" and is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the use of these techniques in an involuntary manner amounts The Supreme Court has held that the compulsory administration of narcoanalysis, polygraph examination and brain electro-stimulation (BEAP) tests is a violation of the right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian also held that the results of such tests cannot be admitted as evidence in a criminal trial. "The impugned techniques cannot be categorised as 'material evidence' since they bear a 'testimonial character' and they cannot be admitted in evidence if they are obtained through the use of compulsion," the court said. "Forcing an individual to undergo any of these techniques violates the standard of 'Substantive Due Process' which is required for restricting personal liberty. Such a violation would occur irrespective of whether the impugned techniques are forcibly administer