The Supreme Court has observed that the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution of India is subject to reasonable restrictions under Article 19(2) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed, "The right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19 (1) (a) is subject to the reasonable restrictions under Article 19 (2) of the Constitution. The right to freedom of speech and expression is not an absolute right. It is subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by the State under Article 19 (2)."The bench was hearing a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 66A of Information Technology Act, 2000, which was struck down by the Supreme Court in 2015.Section 66A of the IT Act, The Supreme Court has observed that the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution of India is subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by the State in the interests of the general public.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna observed, "The right to freedom of speech and expression is subject to reasonable restrictions imposed in the interests of the general public under Article 19(2) of the Constitution of India."The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, which was struck down by the Supreme Court in 2015.Section 66A made it an offence to publish or transmit any information through a computer resource or a communication device, which is "grossly offensive or menacing in character" or which "causes annoyance or inconvenience Faruk v State of Madhya Pradesh (1969) 1 SCR 156, the Court said: "The Court must, in considering the validity of the imputed law imposing a prohibition on carrying on a business or profession, attempt to evaluate its direct and immediate impact upon the Fundamental Rights of the citizens affected thereby and the wider public interest sought to be ensured by the imposition of the prohibition, the necessity to restrict the citizens' freedom, the inherent tendency of the act prohibited to be harmful to the general public and the possibility of achieving the object in question by imposing a less drastic restriction, and in the absence of exceptional circumstances, such as the prevalence of a State of emergency, national or local, or the necessity to maintain essential supplies or the necessity to stop activities which are inherently dangerous, the existence of machinery to satisfy the Administrative Authority that no case for The Supreme Court has held that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 is unconstitutional as it violates the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution.Section 66A of the IT Act deals with punishment for sending offensive messages through a computer resource or a communication device.Section 66A was struck down by the Supreme Court in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015) 10 SCC 459.The Supreme Court bench comprising Justices DY Chandrachud and Surya Kant observed that Section 66A is not saved by Article 19(2) of the Constitution as it does not fall within any of the subject matters mentioned in Article 19(2)."Section 66A is not saved under Article 19(2) The Supreme Court has observed that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, which criminalises sending offensive messages through communication service, suffers from the vice of vagueness and is unconstitutional. "Section 66A of the IT Act, 2000 is unconstitutional as it is vague and suffers from the vice of arbitrariness. It violates Articles 14, 19(1)(a), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution of India," the bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and Surya Kant observed. The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 66A of the Act. Section 66A makes it an offence to send offensive messages through communication service, thus, messages sent with intent to cause annoyance, inconvenience, danger The Supreme Court observed that the expression "grossly offensive or menacing character" used in Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 is vague and violative of Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed that the expression is vague and violative of the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. "The expression "grossly offensive" or "menacing character" is vague and violative of Art 19(1)(a). The expression "grossly offensive" is not defined in Section 66A. The expression "menacing character" is also not defined. The expression "menacing" is defined in Section 503 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Section 5 The Supreme Court has held that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 is unconstitutional and violative of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.Section 66A of the IT Act deals with "Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc." The bench of Justices A.K. Sikri, S.A. Bobde and Abhay Manohar Sapre said: "Section 66A is manifestly arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Section 66A is vague and suffers from the vice of uncertainty. Section 66A is unconstitutional inasmuch as it unduly inhibits freedom of speech and expression. Section 66A is violative of Articles 19(1)(a), 19(1)(g) and 21 The Supreme Court has held that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 is unconstitutional as it violates the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution.Section 66A of the IT Act deals with punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, not being a computer resource or a communication device.The Supreme Court bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, R. Subhash Reddy and M.R. Shah observed that Section 66A is vague, arbitrary and unreasonable. "Section 66A is vague and overbroad and suffers from manifest arbitrariness and unreasonableness. Section 66A is violative of Articles 19(1) and 21 of the Constitution of India. Section 66A is manifestly arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of The Supreme Court has held that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 is unconstitutional as it violates the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution.Section 66A of the IT Act deals with punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, not being a computer resource or a computer network.The Supreme Court bench of Justices DY Chandrachud and Surya Kant observed that Section 66A is unconstitutional as it is violative of Article 19 (1) (a) and does not fall within the ambit of Article 19 (2) of the Constitution of India.Section 66A was introduced in 2008 to amend Section 66 of the IT Act, 2000. Section 66 of the Act deals with punishments for sending Section 79 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 states that intermediaries shall not be liable for third party information, data or communication links made available or hosted by them, if they observe due diligence and other guidelines as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The Information Technology (Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules 2011 were framed to give effect to Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000. Rule 3 of the 2011 Rules states that an intermediary shall observe due diligence while observing his duties under the Act and also observe such other guidelines as prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf. Rule 3(2) states that the intermediary shall inform all users of the computer resource about the various matters set out therein. Rule 3(4) states that the intermediary, upon obtaining knowledge by itself or being The Supreme Court has held that Section 69A of the Information Technology Act and the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009, are constitutionally valid.The bench of Justices DY Chandrachud, MR Shah and AS Bopanna also held that Section 79 of the Information Technology Act is valid subject to certain caveats.Section 66A of the IT Act has been struck down as unconstitutional.Section 69A of the IT Act and the 2009 Rules are constitutionally valid.Section 79 of the IT Act is constitutionally valid subject to certain caveats. Section 118 (d) of Kerala Police Act, 2011 is unconstitutional.Section 118 (d) is violative of Article 19 (1) (a) of