The Supreme Court has held that the Tribunals, constituted under Article 323-A and 323-B of the Constitution of India, possess the competence to test constitutional validity of statutory provisions/rules.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "The Tribunals, constituted under Articles 323-A or 323-B, have the competence to test the constitutionality of a statutory provision or a rule. The Tribunals have the power of judicial review. The Tribunals have the jurisdiction to test the constitutional validity of the statutory provisions or rules. The Tribunals have the competence to test constitutionality of statutory provisions or rules." The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of the Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and The Supreme Court has observed that the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) and the State Administrative Tribunals (SATs) created under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (A.T. Act, 1985) are not substitutes for the High Courts under Article 226 and Article 227 of the Constitution of India.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the CAT and the SATs are not substitutes of the High Courts under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution. "The CAT and the SATs created under the A.T. Act are not substitutes of High Courts under Article 215 of the Constitution. The CAT and the SATs have been created under Article 323A and Article 323B respectively of the Constitution. The CAT The Supreme Court has held that the provisions of the Constitution which allow Parliament and State Legislatures to exclude the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 326 of the Constitution are unconstitutional to the extent they divest the High Courts of jurisdiction in service matters.A bench comprising Justices L. Nageswara Rao, S. Ravindra Bhat and B.R. Gavai delivered the judgment in a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and Article 323B of the Constitution of India.Section 28 of the Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having the force of law, no court shall exercise any jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Tribunal is empowered by or under any law for the time being in force to adjudicate upon.Article 323B( The Supreme Court observed that the power of judicial review, which is an integral part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution, cannot be conferred on any other court or tribunal. "The power of judicial review which is an integral part of the Basic Structure of the Constitution cannot be conferred on any court or tribunal other than the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The power of judicial review is an inseparable part of the independence of judiciary which is also a part of the Basic Structure. The power of judicial review cannot be surrendered to the legislature or the executive. The power of judicial review can only be exercised by the High Courts or the Supreme Court", the bench comprising Justices A.M. Khanwilkar, Dinesh Maheshwari and C.T. Ravikumar observed. The court was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 5(6) of the Administrative Tribun The Supreme Court has observed that the power of judicial review is vested in the High Courts under Article 226 and the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. "The power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is vested in the High Court. The power of judicial review is also vested in the Supreme Court of India under Article 32 of the... The power of judicial review is an essential feature of the basic structure of the Constitution of India. The power of judicial review under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution is vested in the Supreme Court and High Courts respectively. The power of judicial review cannot be taken away from the Supreme Court and High Courts. The power of judicial review has been vested in the High Court under Article 226 and Supreme Court under Article 32. Judicial review is an essential feature of basic structure of the Constitution. The power of judicial The Supreme Court has held that the power of High Courts and Supreme Court to strike down laws is an integral part of the basic structure of Constitution and cannot be ousted or excluded.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed, "We hold that the power of High Courts to exercise judicial review of legislative action vested in them under Article 226 and in the Supreme Court under Article 32 is an integral and essential feature of our Constitution, constituting part of the basic structure of our Constitution. Ordinarily, therefore, this power can never be ousted or excluded." The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Section 12 of the National Medical Commission (NMC) Act, 2019. Section 12 of the NMC Act, 2019 provides for the establishment of the National Medical Commission (N The Supreme Court has held that all decisions of Tribunals created under Articles 323-A and 323-B of the Constitution will be subject to the High Court’s writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, before a division bench of the High Court, within whose territorial jurisdiction, the particular Tribunal falls.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai, AS Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian observed: “In view of the above, we hold that all decisions of the Tribunals created under Articles... 323-A and Articles 323-B will be subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226, before a Division Bench of High Court, within whose territorial Jurisdiction, the particular Tribunal falls.” The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions challenging the constitutional validity of Articles 323 The Tribunals will, however, also have the power to test the constitutional validity of subordinate legislation and rules. However, this power will be subject to one important exception: the Tribunals will not entertain any question regarding the constitutional validity of their parent statutes. In such cases, the concerned High Court may be directly approached. All other decisions of the Tribunals will also be subject to scrutiny by a Division Bench of their respective high courts. We may add that the tribunals will continue to act as courts of first instance in respect of areas of law for which they are constituted. By this we mean that litigants will not be able to directly approach the High Courts, even in cases where they question the constitutional validity of the statutory legislation (except where the legislation that creates the particular tribunal is challenged), by overlooking the jurisdiction of concerned tribunals. Section 5(6) will be interpreted in the manner indicated by the court. All these matters may now