The court was dealing with a batch of petitions filed by Hindu wives whose husbands had embraced Islam and solemnised second marriage. The wives contended that the conversion of their husbands to Islam was only to circumvent Section 494 of IPC, which penalises bigamy. The wives also contended that they continue to be Hindu and therefore, the second marriage of their husbands was void. The wives also contended that their husbands were guilty of offence under Section 495 of IPC. The wives also prayed that their husbands be restrained from entering into the second marriage. The wives also prayed that the second marriage of their husbands be declared null and void. The wives also prayed for maintenance from their husbands. The wives also prayed for custody of their children. The wives also prayed for a direction to their husbands to maintain them. The wives also prayed for interim maintenance. The wives also prayed for direction to their husbands to maintain their children from the first marriage. The wives also prayed for permanent alimony. The wives also prayed for return of dowry articles. The wives also prayed for compensation under the Protection of Women The Supreme Court has held that the second marriage of a convert to Islam would be a void marriage in terms of the provision of Section 494 of the Indian Penal Code.Section 494 of the IPC deals with the offence of marrying again during the lifetime of husband or wife.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed that a Hindu marriage solemnized under the Act cannot be dissolved... The Supreme Court has observed that the second marriage of an apostate to Islam would be a void marriage under Section 494 of Indian Penal Code (IPC).Section 494 of IPC deals with marrying again during the lifetime of the husband or wife.The bench of Justice MR Shah and Justice BV Nagarathna was dealing with an appeal filed by a Muslim man against his conviction under Section 494 of IPC for marrying again during the lifetime of his first wife.The bench observed that a Hindu marriage... The Supreme Court has observed that a Hindu husband who embraces Islam and marries again during the lifetime of the first wife would be guilty of the offence of bigamy punishable under Section 494 of the Justice Kuldip Singh, who authored the majority opinion, observed that the second marriage of a Hindu husband after conversion to Islam, without having the first marriage dissolved under law, is void in terms of Section 494 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the apostate-husband is guilty of the offence under the said section. The court also directed the Government of India to file an affidavit in August 1996 indicating the steps taken and efforts made by the Government of India towards securing a uniform civil code for the citizens of India. Justice Sahai, who concurred with Justice Kuldip Singh's opinion, suggested some of the measures that can be undertaken by the government in this regard. Justice Kuldip Singh observed that the pattern of debate, even today, was the same as voiced forcefully by members of the minority community in the constituent assembly. "If, 'the non-implementation of the provisions contained in article 44 amounts to a grave failure of Indian democracy', represents one side of the picture, the other side claims that, 'the logical probability appears to be that the code will cause dissatisfaction and disintegr