The Bombay High Court has observed that the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India is illusory without the right to live with dignity. "The right to live with dignity is a facet of the right to life guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. Without the right to live with dignity, the right to live would be illusory. The right to live with dignity is a... The Bombay High Court has observed that without the right to live with dignity, which is a facet of Article 21 of the Constitution, the right to life would be illusory. "Without the right to live with dignity, Article 21 would be illusory," said a division bench of Justices S.S. Shinde and N.J. Jamadar. The bench was hearing a plea filed by a 60-year-old woman, who was evicted from her pavement dwelling by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) in The petitioners contended that the eviction of slum dwellers and pavement dwellers would lead to deprivation of their employment, livelihood and, therefore, to their right to life. It was further argued that the economic compulsions which forced these persons to live in slums or on the pavements imparted to their occupation a character of a fundamental right. It was also contended that it was constitutionally impermissible to characterize the pavement dwellers as trespassers because their occupation of pavements arose from economic compulsions. It was further argued that the State was under an obligation to provide the citizens with the necessities of life and in appropriate cases, the courts had the power to issue orders directing the State to promote and protect the right to live. It was further argued that social commitment was the quintessence of the Constitution which defined the conditions under which liberty had to be enjoyed and justice had to be administered. Therefore, the Directive Principles, which were fundamental The Supreme Court observed that the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India includes the right to livelihood.The bench of Justices MR Shah and BV Nagarathna observed that the right to livelihood is an inseparable part of the right to life guaranteed to every citizen under Article 21.The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions filed by slum and pavement dwellers in Mumbai.The... The Supreme Court observed that the right to livelihood guaranteed under Article 21 of Constitution of India is an inseparable part of right to life.The bench of Justices M.R. Shah and B.V. Nagarathna observed that right to livelihood is an inseperable part of right to life guaranteed to every citizen.The bench was dealing with a bunch of petitions filed by slum dwellers in Mumbai challenging the eviction orders passed by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC).The petitioners contended that The Court observed that the right to livelihood is an integral part of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The Court further observed that the right to livelihood guaranteed under Article 21 is a fundamental right and not a legal right. The Court also observed that the right to livelihood includes the right to live with human dignity. The Court further observed that it is the duty of the State to ensure that the right to livelihood is not violated. The Court further observed that if the right to livelihood is violated, it would amount to a violation of the right to life. The Court further observed that if a person is deprived of his means of livelihood, it would amount to deprivation of his right to life. The Court also observed that if a person is evicted from his slum or pavement dwelling, it would lead to deprivation of his means to livelihood. The Court further observed that if deprivation of means of livelihood leads to deprivation of The Supreme Court observed that the procedure prescribed by the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 for removal of encroachments from pavements or footpaths over which the public has a right of passage or access, is not unreasonable, unfair, or unjust.The bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao, BR Gavai and Krishna Murari observed that the pavements or footpaths are public properties intended to serve the convenience of the public. The main reason for laying out the pavements is to ensure that pedestrians can go about their daily affairs with reasonable measure of safety and security. Therefore, the claim of the pavement-dwellers to put up constructions on the pavements cannot be preferred to the right of the pedestrians to use the pavements for the purpose of passage and repassage. "No one has the right to use a public property for a private purpose, without the requisite authorisation. Therefore, it is The Supreme Court has observed that there is no short-term or marginal solution to the problem of squatter colonies and that such colonies are not unique to the cities of India. "Every country, during its historical evolution, faces the problem of squatter settlements, and most countries of the underdeveloped world face this problem, today. Even the highly developed, affluent societies face this problem, though with their larger resources, and smaller population, their task is far less difficult," the bench of Justices L. Nageswara Rao and BR Gavai observed.The bench was dealing with a batch of petitions filed by slum dwellers and pavement dwellers in Mumbai challenging the eviction notices issued by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) and the State of Maharashtra. The petitions also challenged the constitutional validity of Section 314 of the Maharashtra Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, which empowers the In order to minimize the hardship involved in the eviction, the Court directed that the slums, wherever they are situated, will not be removed until the end of the monsoon season, i.e., until October 31, 2021, and thereafter, only in accordance with the judgment. The Court also directed that pavement dwellers, whether censored or uncensored, will not be removed until October 31,2021. The Writ Petitions were disposed of accordingly. There was no order as to costs. Case no. – Writ Petition (L) No. Principal Bench of the Delhi High Court Justice Swarana Kanta Sharma and Justice Subramonium Prasad Counsel for the Petitioner: Mr. Amit Chaudhary, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, Advocate for Petitioner in W.P. (