the respondent is Raj Narain. civil Appeal No. 909 of 1975 is the cross
objection of the respondent. On 14 July, 1975 it was directed that both the
appeals would be heard together. The appeals arise out of the judgment of
the High Court of Allahabad dated 12 June, 1975. The High Court held that
the appellant held herself out as a candidate from 29 December, 1970 and
was guilty of having committed corrupt practice by having obtained the
assistance of Gazetted Officers in furtherance of her election prospects. The
High Court further found the appellant guilty of corrupt practice committed
under Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
hereinafter referred to as the 1951 Act by having obtained the assistance of
Yashpal Kapur a Gazetted Officer for the furtherance of her election
prospects. The High Court held the appellant to be disqualified for a period
of six years from the date of the order as provided in Section 8(a) of the
1951 Act. The High Court awarded costs of the election petition to the
respondent.
2. It should be stated here that this judgment disposes of both the appeals.
Under directions of this Court the original record of the High Court was
called for. The appeal filed by the respondent with regard to Issues Nos. 2,
4, 6, 7 and 9 formed the subject-matter of cross objections in civil Appeal
No. 909 of 1975. The cross-objections are the same which form grounds of
appeal filed by the respondent in the High Court at Allahabad, against an
order of dismissal of civil Misc. Writ No. 3761 of 1975 filed in the High Court
at Allahabad.
3. The Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act. 1975 contains three
principal features. First, Article 71 has been substituted by a new Article 71.
The new Article 71 states that subject to the provisions of the Constitution,
Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the
election of a President or Vice-President including the grounds on which
such election may be questioned.
4. The second feature is insertion of Article 329-A in the Constitution. Clause
4 of Article 329-A is challenged in the present appeals. There are six clauses
in Article 329-A.
5. The first clause states that subject to the provisions of Chapter II of Part
V (except Sub-clause (e) of Clause (1) of Article 102) no election to either
House of Parliament of a person who holds the office of Prime Minister at the
time of such election or is appointed as Prime Minister after such election;
and to the House of the People of a person who holds the office of Speaker
of that House at the time of such election or who is chosen as the Speaker
for that House after such election, shall be called in question, except be fore
such authority (not being any such authority as is referred to in Clause (b)
of Article 329) or body and in such manner as may be provided for by or
under any law made by Parliament and any such law may provide for all
other matters relating to doubts and dispute in relation to such election
including the grounds on which such election may be questioned.
6. Under the second clause the validity of any such law as is referred to in
Clause (1) and the decision of any authority or body under such law shall
not be called in question in any court.
7. The third clause states that where any person is appointed as Prime
Minister or, as the case may be, chosen to the office of the Speaker of the
House of the People, while an election petition referred to in Article 329(b)
in respect of his election to either House of Parliament or, as the case may
be, to the House of the People is pending, such election petition shall abate
upon such person being appointed as Prime Minister or, as the case may be,
being chosen to the office of the Speaker of the House of the People, but
such election may be called in question under any such law as is referred to
in Clause (1).
8. The fourth clause which directly concerns the present appeals states that
no law made by Parliament before the commencement of the Constitution
(Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, in so far as it relates to election
petitions and matters connected therewith, shall apply or shall be deemed
ever to have applied to or in relation to the election of any such person as is
referred to in Clause (1) to either House of Parliament and such election
shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void on any ground
on which such election could be declared to be void under any such law and
notwithstanding any order made by any court, before such commencement,
declaring such election to be void, such election shall continue to be valid in
all respects and any such order and any finding on which such order is
based shall be and shall be deemed always to have been void and of no
effect.
9. The fifth clause states that any appeal or cross appeal against any such
order of any court as is referred to in Clause (4) pending immediately before
the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975, before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the
provisions of Clause (4).
10. The sixth clause states that the provisions of this Article shall have
effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution.
11. The third feature in the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act is
that in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution after Entry 86 and before the
Explanation several Entries Nos. 87 to 124 inclusive are inserted. The
Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Act, 1974 and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 are
mentioned in Entry 87.
12. The respondent contends that the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Act, 1974 and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975
referred to as the Amendment Acts, 1974 and 1975 do not enjoy
Constitutional immunity because these Acts destroy or damage basic
structure or basic features.
13. In view of the challenge by the respondent to the Constitutional validity
of the Amendment Acts, 1974 and 1975 notice was given to the Attorney
General.
14. The appeals were to be heard on 11 August, 1975. In view of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975 which came into existence
on 10 August, 1975 the hearing was adjourned till 25 August, 1975.
15. The Constitutional validity of Clause (4) of Article 329-A falls for
consideration. Clause (4) of Article 329-A is challenged on two grounds.
First, it destroys or damages the basic features or basic structure of the
Constitution. Reliance is placed in support of the contention on the majority
view of 7 learned Judges in Kesavananda Bharati Sripadanagalavaru v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . 16. It should be stated here that the hearing has proceeded on the
assumption that it is not necessary to challenge the majority view in
Kesavananda Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . The
contentions of the respondent are these : First, under Article 368 only
general principles governing the organs of the State and the basic principles
can be laid down. An amendment of the Constitution does not contemplate
any decision in respect of individual cases. Clause (4) of Article 329-A is said
to be in exercise of a' purely judicial power which is not included in the
constituent power conferred by Article 368.
17. Second, the control over the result of the elections and on the question
whether the election of any person is valid or invalid is vested in the
judiciary under the provisions of Article 329 and Article 136. The jurisdiction
of judicial determination is taken away, and, therefore, the democratic
character of the Constitution is destroyed.
18. Third, the Amendment destroys and abrogates the principle of equality.
It is said that there is no rational basis for differentiation between persons
holding high offices and other persons elected to Parliament.
19. Fourth, the rule of law is the basis for democracy and judicial review.
The fourth clause makes the provisions of Part VI of the Representation of
the People Act inapplicable to the election of the Prime Minister and the
Speaker.
20. Fifth, Clause (4) destroys not only judicial review but also separation of
power. The order of the High Court declaring the election to be void is
declared valid. The cancellation of the judgment is denial of political justice
which is the basic structure of the Constitution.
21. The second ground is that the Constitution of the House which passed
the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act is illegal. It is said that a
number of members of Parliament of the two Houses were detained by
executive order after 26 June, 1975. These persons were not supplied any
grounds of detention or given any opportunity of making a representation
against their detention. Unless the President convenes a session of the full
Parliament by giving to all members thereof an opportunity to attend the
session and exercise their right of speech and vote, the convening of the
session will suffer from illegality and unconstitutionality and cannot be
regarded as a session of the two Houses of Parliament. The mere fact that a
person may be deprived of his right to move any court to secure his release
from such illegal detention by means of a presidential order under Article
359 does not render the detention itself either legal or Constitutional. The
important leaders of the House have been prevented from participation.
Holding of the session and transacting business are unconstitutional.
22. Under the first ground these are the contentions. The Constitution
Amendment affects the basic structure of institutional pattern adopted by
the Constitution. The basic feature of separation of powers with the role of
independence of judiciary is changed by denying jurisdiction of this Court to
test the validity of the election. The essential feature of democracy will be
destroyed if power is conceded to Parliament to declare the elections void
according to law under which it has been held to be valid. This is illustrated
by saying that Parliament can by law declare the election of persons against
the predominant ruling party to be void. If the majority party controls the
legislature and the executive, the legislature could not have any say as to
whether the executive was properly elected. Free and fair elections are part
of democratic structure and an election which has been held to be invalid for
violation of the principles of free and fail elections and by commission of
corrupt practices is validated. The basic structure of equality is violated by
providing that those who hold office of Prime Minister and Speaker are
above law although election laws were there. The persons who will hold the
office of Prima Minister and Speaker have been free from those laws and
they are not under rule of law and there is no judicial review with regard to
their elections.
23. The nature of the constituent power is legislative. The constituent power
cannot exercise judicial power. Exercise of judicial power or of a purely
executive power is not power of amendment of the Constitution. The
Constitution may be amended to change Constitutional provisions but the
constituent power cannot enact that a person is declared to be elected. The
Consequence of change of law may be that the decision given by a court
under the law as it stood will not stand.
24. The respondent contends that judicial review is an essential feature of
basic structure because of the doctrine of separation of powers for these
reasons : Judicial review is basic structure in the matter of election to
ensure free, fair and pure election. In the American and the Australian
Constitutions the judicial power of the State is located in the judiciary. There
is no such provision in our Constitution. The Executive, the Legislature and
the Judiciary are all treated under our Constitution with respective spheres.
The jurisdiction of this Court and of High Courts under our Constitution is
dealt with by Articles under the Heads of the Union Judiciary and the State
Judiciary. Under Article 136 any Tribunal or Court is amenable to the
jurisdiction of this Court. The corollary drawn from this is that if under
Clause (4) of the Thirty-ninth Amendment the power of judicial review is
taken away it amounts to destruction of basic structure.
25. In England formerly Parliament used to hear election disputes. In 1870
Parliament found that because of political factions it would be better to leave
the task of deciding controverted elections to Judges. Parliament delegated
its power of deciding controverted elections to Courts. Under the English
Law the Courts hear and make a report to Parliament. In America each
House shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its
own Members. That is Article 1, Section 5 of the American Constitution. In
Australia any question of a disputed election to either House, shall be
determined by the house in which the question arises. Under the German
Federal Republic Constitution the legislature decides whether a person has
lost his seat. Against the decision of the Bundestag an appeal shall lie to
Federal Constitution Court.
26. The view of Story on the American Constitution is that the power to
judge elections, returns and qualifications of the members of each House
composing the legislature is to be lodged in the legislature. Story says that
no other body can be so perpetually watchful to guard its own rights and
privileges from infringement (See Story page 585).
27. In Corpus Juris Vol. 16 (1956) it is said that the judiciary cannot
exercise powers which are to be found in the other two departments of
Government which are normally legislative or powers which are generally
executive in their nature. All matters relating to or affecting elections are
political questions and, as such, are not questions for the judiciary. All
matters relating to or affecting elections are, in the absence of controlling
Constitutional or statutory provisions to the contrary, political questions and,
as such, are not questions for the judiciary. So, subject to express
Constitutional restrictions, all matters relating to the holding of elections
and determining their results, including contests are political questions (pp.
691, 692, 710).
28. In Corpus Juris Vol. 29 (1965) if : is stated that under Constitutional
provision as to conferring on the legislature the power to determine by law,
before what authority, and in what manner the trial or contested elections
shall be' conducted, the legislature is given broad power. A Constitutional
provision authorising the legislature to provide for the mode of contesting
elections in all cases not otherwise specifically provided for in the
Constitution itself confers on the legislature adequate authority to provide
for all election contests and to determine where and by what means election
contests shall be conducted. The right to contest an election is not a
common  law right. Elections belong to the political branch of the
Government, and, in the absence of the special Constitutional or statutory
provisions, are beyond the control of the judicial power.' (Sections 245,
246). A contested election case is a proceeding in which the public is
interested, since it is for the public good. An election contest is not merely a
proceeding for the adjudication and settlement of the private rights of rival
claimants to an office. It is the public interest, not the parties' claims, which
is the paramount legislative concern (Section 247).
29. In America disputed elections are decided by the Legislature. In Taylor v.
Beckham the American Supreme Court held that a determination of an
election contest for the office of the Governor is a political question and is
not justiciable. In Truman H. Newberry v. United States of America (1920)
65 L Ed 913 the American Supreme Court held that the manner of elections
can be controlled. In D avid S. Barry v. United States of America Ex. Rel.
Thomas W. Cunninggham the decision of the American Supreme Court in
Charles W. Baker v. Joe C. Carr (1962) 7 L Ed 2d 663 was referred to in
order to find out as to what aspects of elections would be justiciable and not
a political question. In Baker v. Carr (supra) the delimitation of
constituencies was held to be a justiciable issue. In Julian Bond v. James
'Sloppy' Floyd (1966) 17 L Ed 2d 235 the exclusion of an elected
representative because of his statement attacking the Vietnam policy was
held to be justiciable on the ground that it was not within the jurisdiction of
the Legislature to find out whether a member was sincere in regard to his
oath of the legislature. In Adam Clayton Powell v. John W. McCormack
(1969) 23 L Ed 2d 491 the disqualification by the House of a Congressman
on the basis of qualification on the ground which was not in the Constitution
was held to be justiciable. The Federal District Court has jurisdiction over
the subject-matter of controversies arising under the Constitution. The
conferment of power on each House in America to be a judge of elections is
an exclusive ground of power and constitutes the House to be the sole and
ultimate Tribunal.
30. The American decisions show that if the House claims additional power
to disqualify a member on the ground other than those stated in the
Constitution judicial review against disqualification would be available. In
Bond's case (1966) 17 L Ed 2d 235 (supra) disqualification was on an
unconstitutional ground that his statement on Vietnam policy was a matter
of free speech and expression. The court did not decide an election dispute
but as a custodian of judicial power judged whether the House was acting
within its power.
31. Parliament itself can also hear election disputes. That was the English
practice until the Grenville Act, 1868 when Parliament conferred power on
courts. Before 1770, controverted elections were tried by the whole House
of Commons as party questions. The House found that the exercise of its
privilege could be submitted to a Tribunal constituted by law to secure
impartiality in the administration of justice according to the laws of the land.
In 1868 the jursdiction of the House in the trial of controverted elections
was transferred by statute to the courts of law. The present procedure is
contained in the English Representation of the People Act, 1949. The trial is
confided to judges selected from the judiciary. Provision is made in each
case for constitution a rota from whom these judges are selected.' The
House has no cognizance of these proceedings until their determination
when the judges certify their determination, in writing, to the Speaker,
which is final to all intents and purposes. Trial is not a proceeding of the
House. The judges are to make a report in any case where charge has been
made in the petition of corrupt and illegal practice. Provision is also made
for the trial of a special case. All certificates and reports of the election court
are entered in the Journals of the House. Under Section 124 (5) of the
English Representation of the People Act, 1949, it is the duty of the House
to make orders for carrying the determination of the judges into execution.
32. Judicial review in many matters under statute may be excluded. In
many cases special jurisdiction is created to deal with matters assigned to
such authorities. A special forum is even created to hear election disputes. A
right of appeal may be conferred against such decision. If Parliament acts as
the forum for determination of election disputes it may be a question of
parliamentary privilege and the courts may not entertain any review from
such decisions. That is because the exercise of power by the Legislature in
determining disputed elections may be called legislative power. A distinction
arises between what can be called the traditional judicial determination by
courts and tribunals on the one hand and the peculiar jurisdiction by the
legislature in determining controverted elections on the other.
33. The legal order is a system of general and individual norms connected
with each other according to the principle that law regulates its own
creation. Each norm of this order is created according to the provisions of
another norm and ultimately according to the provisions of the basic norm
constitution the unity of this system, the legal order. A norm belongs to a
certain legal order, because it is created by an organ of the legal community
constituted by this order. Creation of law is application of law. The creation
of a legal norm is normally an application of the higher norm, regulating its
creation. The application of higher norm is the creation of a lower norm
determined by the higher norm. A judicial decision is an act by which a
general norm, a statute, is applied but at the same time an individual norm
is created binding one or both parties to the conflict. Legislation is creation
of law. Taking it into account is application of law. The higher norm may
determine the organ and the procedure by which a lower norm and the
contents of the lower norm are created. For a norm the creation of which is
not determined at all by another norm cannot belong to another legal order.
The individual creating a norm cannot be considered the organ of the legal
community, his norm-creating function cannot be imputed to the
community, unless in performing the function he applies a norm of the legal
order constitution the community. Every law-creating act must be a law
applying act. It must apply a norm preceding the act in order to be an act of
the legal order or the community constituted by it. When settling a dispute
between two parties a court applies a general norm or statutory or
customary law. Simultaneously, the court creates an individual norm
providing that a definite sanction shall be executed against a definite
individual. The individual norm is related to the general norm as the statute
is related to the Constitution. The judicial function is thus like legislation,
both creation and application of law. The judicial function is ordinarily
determined by the general norms both as to procedure and as to the
contents of the norm to be created, whereas legislation is usually
determined by the Constitution only in the former respect.
34. The general norm which attaches abstractly determined consequences,
has to be applied to concrete cases in order that the sanction determined in
abstract may be ordered and executed in concrete. The two essential
elements of judicial functions are to apply a pre-existing general norm in
which a certain consequence is attached to certain conditions. The existence
of the concrete conditions in connection with the concrete consequence are
what may be called individualization of the general and abstract norm to the
individual norm of the judicial decision.
35. The contention is that the constituent power is an exercise in legislative
process. The constituent power, it is said, can exercise legislative as well as
judicial and executive powers. It is said that if a legislation can validate a
matter declared invalid by a judgment the constituent power may equally do
so. Special emphasis is laid on Article 105 of the Constitution which is
amended by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act. Article 105(e)
speaks of disqualification by certain laws. The Constitutional amendment
seeks to amend Article 105 and remove the disqualification in the case of
the Prime Minister and the Speaker. Reliance was placed on the decisions in
Abeyesekara v. Jayatilake 1932 AC 260 and Piare Dusadh v. The King
Emperor MANU/FE/0011/1943 that an amendment is supportable to
invalidate a judgment.
36. Abeyesekera's case 1932 AC 260 (supra) is an authority for the
proposition that the legal infirmity can be removed and active indemnity can
be passed to relieve from penalties incurred.
37. In Piare Dusadh's case MANU/FE/0011/1943 (supra) the Special
Criminal Courts (Repeal) Ordinance, 1943 which conferred validity and full
effectiveness on sentences passed by special courts which functioned under
the Special Criminal Courts Ordinance, 1942 was challenged. It was argued
in Piare Dusadh's case (supra) that the 1943 Ordinance attempted to
exercise judicial power. The Federal Court did not accept the contention on
the ground that in India the legislature has enacted laws providing that suits
which had been dismissed on a particular view of the law must be restored
and retried. Our Federal Court said that Parliament simply takes up certain
determinations which exist in fact, though made without authority, and
prescribes not that they shall be acts done by a Board of Review, but that
they shall be treated as they would be treated if they were such acts. The
sections do not constitute an exercise of the judicial power. The legislature
had not attempted to decide the question of the guilt or innocence of any of
the accused. That question had as a matter of fact been decided by tribunals
which were directed to follow a certain judicial procedure. Our Federal Court
held that once the decisions of the special courts were held void for want of
jurisdiction the legislature created those special courts and authorised them
to try cases and pass sentences. The legislature gave jurisdiction to the
courts to pass the sentences. The Ordinance did not exercise any judicial
power because the sentences in due course were subject to an appeal and
review by the regular courts of the land.
38. The power of the legislature to validate matters which have been found
by judgments or orders of competent courts and Tribunals to be invalid or
illegal is a well-known pattern. The legislature validates acts and things
done by which the basis of judgments or orders of competent courts and
Tribunal is changed and the judgments and orders are made ineffective. All
the Sales Tax Validation cases, the election validation cases are illustrations
of that proposition. The present appeals are not of the type of providing
indemnity against penalties or determining existing facts to be treated in
accordance with change of law.
39. The effect of validation is to change the law so as to alter the basis of
any judgment, which might have been given on the basis of old law and
thus make the judgment ineffective. A formal declaration that the judgment
rendered under the old Act is void, is not necessary. If the matter is pending
in appeal, the appellate court has to give effect to the altered law and
reverse the judgment. The rendering of a judgment ineffective by changing
its basis by legislative enactment is not an encroachment on judicial power
but a legislation within the competence of the Legislature rendering the
basis of the judgment non est. If a competent court has found that a
particular tax or levy has been imposed by a law, which is void because the
legislature passing the law was not competent to pass the law, then the
competent legislature has validated the tax or levy by a validation Act
involving a re-enactment of the invalid law. Where the competent legislature
has passed a law which is contrary to any of the Fundamental Rights in Part
III of the Constitution and the law has been declared void by a competent
court, the appropriate legislature has passed a retrospective law validating
the actions taken under the old invalid law by curing the defects in the old
law so as to make the new law consistent with Part III of the Constitution.
40. Where invalid elections declared by reason of corrupt practices have
been validated by changing the definition of corrupt practices in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 retrospectively the original judgment
is rendered ineffective.
(See Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana MANU/SC/0275/1969 : [1970]2SCR835 . 41. Our Federal Court in Basanta Chandra Ghose v. The King Emperor
MANU/FE/0020/1944 : 1944 FCR 295 dealt with the validity and effect of
Ordinance No. 3 of 1944. One of the objects of that Ordinance was to enact
a presumption in the Ordinance itself in favour of detention orders to
preclude their being questioned in courts of law and to take away or limit
the power of the High Court to make orders under Section 491 of the
Cri.P.C. The third object of the Ordinance was challenged on the ground that
Section 10(2) of the Ordinance which provided that if at the commencement
there is pending in any Court any proceeding by which the validity of an
order having effect by virtue of Section 6 as if it had been made under this
Ordinance is called in question, that proceeding is hereby discharged.
Section 10(2) of the Ordinance was challenged on the ground that this was
in abrogation of judicial power by legislative authority. It was said that the
legislative authority only passed the law and the disposal of the particular
case could remain the function of the court. Section 10(2) of the Ordinance
was said not to leave it to the court to apply the rule of law to the decision
of cases but to discharge all pending proceedings. Our Federal Court,
noticed the distinction between a legislative act and the judicial act. and said
"a direction such), a proceeding is discharged is clearly a indicial act and not
an enactment of law". In Piare Dusadh's case MANU/FE/0011/1943 (supra)
the latter Ordinance provided that the decisions of the earlier Tribunals
which were negatived by a decision of the Federal Court should be treated
as decisions of duly constituted Tribunals. That was held not to constitute a
judicial power by the Ordinance making authority. In Basanta Chandra
Ghose's case (supra) the Federal Court held Section 10(2) of the Ordinance
to be a direct disposal of cases by the legislature itself. Basanta Chandra
Ghose's case (supra) was decided on the ground that the section in the
Ordinance discharged the proceedings. There was nothing left to the Court.
42. Counsel on behalf of the respondent contended that the constituent
power could deal with amendments of the Constitution, but could not
exercise constituent power in relation to validating an election.
43. Judicial Review is one of the distinctive features of the American
Constitutional Law. In America equal protection of the laws is based on the
concept of due process of law. These features are not in our Constitution.
44. In Bond's case (1966) 17 L Ed 2d 235 (supra) the House claimed
additional power to disqualify a member on grounds other than those stated
in the Constitution. It was conceded there as it will appear at page 244 of
the Report that judicial review against the disqualification decreed by the
House would be available if a member was excluded on racial ground or
other unconstitutional grounds. The House claimed that the ground on which
Bond was disqualified was not an unconstitutional ground. The court held
that there was no distinction between a disqualification decreed by the
House on racial grounds and one alleged to violate the right of free speech.
The court concluded that Bond was deprived of his Constitutional rights
guaranteed by the First Amendment by the disqualification decreed by the
House. This was not a case of deciding an election' dispute by the House
and the Court sitting on appeal on the decision of the House. This is a case
where a disqualification was imposed on unconstitutional grounds, thereby
affecting the fundamental rights of Bond. This is not an authority for the
proposition that the decision of the House on an election dispute would be
open to judicial review.
45. The case of Powell v. McCormack (1969) 23 L Ed 2d 491 (supra) is also
one of disqualification by the House of a Congressman on the basis of
qualification which the House added to those specified in the Constitution. In
other words, the House purported to unseat a member by disqualifying him
on a ground not given in the Constitution. This was not a case of deciding an
election dispute. Under the statute in question the Federal District Court had
jurisdiction over all civil actions where controversy arises under the
Constitution. This was a case entertained on the ground that exclusion of a
member of the House was unconstitutional. This case is an authority for the
proposition that if a power is committed to a particular organ, the court
cannot adjudicate upon it. Where a power is exercised by one organ, which
is not committed to that particular organ of the State and such exercise of
power is violative of a Constitutional provision the matter becomes
cognizable by courts. The Court held that a question of unconstitutional
exclusion of a member is not barred from judicial review as a political
question.
46. Judicial review is not to be founded on any Article similar to the
American Constitution. In the Australian Constitution also the judicial power
is located in the court. The doctrine of separation of powers is carried into
effect in countries like America, Australia. In our Constitution there is
separation of powers in a broad sense. But the larger question is whether
there is any doctrine of separation of powers when it comes to exercise of
constituent power. The doctrine of separation of powers as recognised in
America is not applicable to our country. (See Delhi Laws Act; Jayantilal Sodhan v. F.N. Rana MANU/SC/0046/1963 : [1964]5SCR294 ; Chandra Mohan v. State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0052/1966 : (1967)ILLJ412SC
and Udai Ram Sharma v. Union of India MANU/SC/0154/1968 : [1968]3SCR41 . 47. The rigid separation of powers as under the American Constitution or
under the Australian Constitution does not apply to our country. Many
powers which are strictly judicial have been excluded from the purview of
the courts. The whole subject of election has been left to courts traditionally
under the Common  Law and election disputes and matters are governed by
the Legislature. The question of the determination of election disputes has
particularly been regarded as a special privilege of Parliament in England. It
is a political question in the United States. Under our Constitution
Parliament has inherited all the privileges, powers and immunities of the
British House of Common s. In the case of election disputes Parliament has
defined the procedure by law. It can at any time change that procedure and
take over itself the whole question. There is, therefore, no question of any
separation of powers being involved in matters concerning elections and
election petitions.
48. When the constituent power exercises powers the constituent power
comprises legislative, executive, and judicial powers. All powers flow from
the constituent power through the Constitution to the various departments
or heads. In the hands of the constituent authority there is no demarcation
of powers. It is only when the constituent authority de fines the authorities
or demarcates the areas that separation of power is discussed. The
constituent power is independent of the doctrine of separation of powers.
The constituent power is sovereign. It is the power which creates the organs
and distributes the powers.
49. The constituent power is suigeneris. It is different from legislative power.
The position of unlimited law making power is the criterion of legal
sovereignty, The constituent power is sovereign because the Constitution
flows from the constituent power.
50. In Article 329-A an exercise of judicial power is the question for
determination. In legislative processes there may be judicial process. If the
legislature has to fix the amount or lay down the principle for fixation of
amount the question will arise as to whether this is exercise of judicial
power. The determination of the amount will involve judicial procedure.
When the legislature determines the amount the fixation of amount is purely
by legislative process. But in doing so the legislature takes into account
factors relevant to individual properties.
51. Every organ of the State has to ascertain facts which make the
foundation of its own decision. The executive usually collects its materials
through its departments. The judiciary acts in a field where there are two or
more parties be fore it and upon evidence placed before it pronounces its
verdict according to principles of natural justice. The legislature is entitled to
obtain information from any source. The legislature may call witnesses. The
rule of Audi Alteram Partem is not applicable in a legislative process.
Legislation is usually general. It may sometimes be for special reasons an
individual case. There is no doubt that the constituent power is not the
same as legislative power. The distinction between constituent power and
legislative power is always to be borne in mind because the constituent
power is higher in norm.
52. Judicial review in election disputes is not a compulsion. Judicial review of
decisions in election disputes may be entrusted by law to a Judicial Tribunal.
If it is to a Tribunal or to the High Court the judicial review will be attracted
either under the relevant law providing for appeal to this Court or Article
136 may be attracted. Under Article 329(b) the contemplated law may vest
the power to entertain election petitions in the House itself which may
determine the dispute by a resolution after receiving a report from a special
Committee. In such judicial review may be eliminated without involving
amendment of the Constitution, The Constitution permits by amendment
exclusion of judicial review of a matter if it is necessary to give effect to the
Directive Principles of State Policy. A similar power may be available when
such exclusion is needed in the larger interest of the security of the State.
In either case the exclusion of judicial review does not mean that principles
of equality are violated. It only means that the appropriate body making the
law satisfied itself and determines conclusively that principles of equality
have not been violated. That body conclusively makes classification for the
purpose of applying the principles of equality. It is said that in this class of
cases the answer to the question of the validity of the classification rests on
factors to which the court has no access and the materials may be of highly
confidential nature and the decision has to be on a matter of political
necessity. If judicial review is excluded the court is not in a position to
conclude that principles of equality have been violated
53. Equality of status as well as equality of opportunity is a fundamental
right in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. It also means equality before
law and equal protection of the laws. Equality is spoken in the Preamble.
There is liberty to legislature to classify to establish equality. When Articles
31-A and 31-B eliminated judicial review the meaning was not that the
legislature would go on discriminating. The task of classification can be left
to the legislature. It is the very nature of legislation that classification must
be in public interest. The amending body has excluded judicial review in Articles 31-A, 31-B and 31-C. 54. Exclusion of the operation of the equality principle from some fields is
Constitutionally possible. Article 33 excludes judicial review in matters
relating to the Armed Forces. Article 262(2) excludes jurisdiction of courts in
water disputes.
55. Decisions in election disputes may be made by the legislature itself or
may be made by courts or tribunals on behalf of the legislature or may be
made by courts and tribunals on their own exercising judicial functions. The
concept of free and fair election is worked out by the Representation of the
People Act. The Act provides a definition of "corrupt practice" for the
guidance of the court. In making the law the legislature acts on the concept
of free and fair election. In any legislation relating to the validity of "
elections the concept of free and fair elections is an important consideration.
In the process of election the concept of free and fair election is worked out
by formulating the principles of franchise, and the free exercise of franchise.
In cases of disputes as to election, the concept of free and fair election
means that disputes are fairly and justly decided. Electoral offences are
statutory ones. It is not possible to hold that the concept of free and fair
election is a basic structure, as contended for by the respondent. Some
people may advocate universal franchise. Some people may advocate
proportional representation. Some people may advocate educational
qualifications for voters. Some people may advocate property qualifications
for voters. Instances can be multiplied on divergence of views in regard to
qualifications for voters, qualifications of members, forms of corrupt
practices. That is why there is law relating to and regulating elections.
56. Clause (4) in Article 329-A has done four things. First, it has wiped out
not merely the judgment but also the election petition and the law relating
thereto. Secondly, it has deprived the right to raise a dispute about the
validity of the election by not having provided another forum. Third there is
no judgment to deal with and no right or dispute to adjudicate upon. Fourth,
the constituent power of its own legislative judgment has validated the
election.
57. At the outset it has to be noticed that constituent power is not the same
as ordinary law making power. On behalf of the appellant it was rightly
contended that if any amendment of Article 105 of the Constitution had to
be made, it had to be made by amendment of the Constitution. The matter
does not rest there.
58. If no law prior to the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act will
apply to election petitions or matters connected therewith the result is that
there is not only no forum for adjudication of election disputes but that
there is also no election petition in the eye of law. The insurmountable
difficulty is in regard to the process and result of validating the election by
Clause (4). Two answers were given on behalf of the appellant. One was
that the validation of the election is itself the law. The other was that the
constituent power applied its own norms to the election petition. Both the
answers are unacceptable.' If the election petition itself did not have any
existence in law there was no petition which could be looked into by the
constituent power. If there was no petition to look into it is difficult to
comprehend as to what norms were applied to the election dispute. The
dispute has to be seen. The dispute has to be adjudicated upon.
59. Clause (4) suffers from these infirmities. First, the forum might be
changed but another forum has to be created. If the constituent power
became itself the forum to decide the disputes the constituent power by
repealing the law in relation to election petitions and matters connected
therewith did not have any petition to seize upon to deal with the same.
Secondly, any decision is to be made' in accordance with law. Parliament has
power to create law and apply the same. In the present case, the
constituent power did not have any law to apply to the case, because the
previous law did not apply and no other law was applied by Clause (4). The
validation of the election in the present case is, therefore, not by applying
any law and it, therefore, offends Rule of Law.
60. It is true that no express mention is made in our Constitution of vesting
in the judiciary the judicial power as is to be found in the American
Constitution. But a division of the three main functions of Government is
recognised in our Constitution. Judicial power in the sense of the judicial
power of the State is vested in the Judiciary. Similarly, the Executive and the
Legislature are vested with powers in their spheres. Judicial power has lain
in the hands of the Judiciary prior to the Constitution and also since the
Constitution. It is not the intention that the powers of the Judiciary should
be passed to or be shared by the Executive or the Legislature or that the
powers of the Legislature or the Executive should pass to or be shared by
the Judiciary.
61. The constituent power is sovereign. Law making power is subject to the
Constitution. Parliament may create forum to hear election disputes.
Parliament may itself hear election disputes. Whichever body will hear
election disputes will have to apply norms. Norms are legal standards. There
is no discrimination if classification on rational basis is made for
determination of disputes relating to persons holding the office of Prime
Minister or the Speaker. The changes effected by the Amendment Acts 1974
and 1975 apply to all and there is no discrimination. Retrospective
legislation is not by itself discrimination. The changes introduced to the
1951 Act apply to all.
62. Clause 4 of Article 329-A in the present case invalidating the election
has passed a declaratory judgment and not a law. The legislative judgment
in Clause 4 is an exercise of judicial power. The constituent power can
exercise judicial power but it has to apply law.
63. The validation of the election is not by applying legal norms. Nor can it
be said that the validation of election in Clause 4 is by norms set up by the
constituent power.
64. Clause 5 in Article 329-A states that an appeal against any order of any
court referred to in Clause 4 pending, before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, before the Supreme
Court, shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of Clause 4. The
appeal cannot be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of Clause 4
inasmuch as the validation of the election cannot rest on Clause 4.
65. In view of the conclusion that the appeal cannot be disposed of in
conformity with Clause 4, it is necessary to hear the appeals on other
grounds in accordance with the provisions of the 1951 Act and the
Amendment Acts, 1974 and 1975.
66. The second contention of the respondent is that the session of the Lok
Sabha and the Rajya Sabha is invalid for these reasons. If the Executive
illegally and unconstitutionally detains any person the detention affects the
validity of the proceedings. A number of members of Parliament of the two
Houses, namely, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha were detained by
executive orders after 26th June, 1975 and before the summoning of a
session of the two Houses of Parliament. Parliament commenced the
sessions on 21st July, 1975. None of the members of Parliament were either
supplied any grounds of detention or given any opportunity to make any
representation against their detention. The President who was the authority
to summon  a session of Parliament issued the Presidential Order under
Article 359 of the Constitution on 27th June, 1975. The right of the detained
members of Parliament to move any court for the enforcement of their
fundamental right under Article 22 of the Constitution was taken away by
the executive order of the President who became a party to the
unconstitutional and illegal detention of the members of Parliament by
preventing them from securing their release.
67. The Constitutional position of the two Houses of Parliament is governed
by the provisions of Articles 79 and 81 of the Constitution. The respondent
contends that unless the President convenes a session of the Full Parliament
by giving to all members thereof an opportunity to attend the session and
exercise their right to speech and vote, the convening of the session will
suffer from illegality and unconstitutionality and cannot be regarded as a
session of the two Houses of Parliament. Any business transacted in a
session of such truncated House cannot, therefore, be regarded in law as a
session of a House.
68. The mere fact that a person who is under unconstitutional and illegal
detention may be deprived of his right to move a court to secure his release
from such illegal detention by means of a Presidential Order under Article
359 is said by the respondent not to render the detention of a person either
legal or Constitutional, and, therefore, such a detenu must be provided an
opportunity to participate in the proceedings of the House. It is emphasised
by the respondent that when important leaders of different parties are
unconstitutionally prevented from participating in the session of the House,
a session cannot be held for deliberations in which different members
influence the views of others by their own participation. If in the holding of a
session and in transacting business therein, the provisions of the
Constitution are not complied with, this is said to amount to illegality or
unconstitutionality and not a mere procedural irregularity within the
meaning of Article 122(1) of the Constitution.
69. The essence of the respondent's contention is that the right of
participation of some members of the House of Parliament in the
proceedings of Parliament under Article 105(3) of the Constitution has been
interfered with. When a member is excluded from participating in the
proceedings of the House, that is a matter concerning Parliament and the
grievance of exclusion is in regard to proceedings within the walls of
Parliament. In regard to rights to be exercised within the walls of the House
the House itself is the judge, (see May's Parliamentary Practice 18th Ed. pp. 82-83 (1884) 12 QBD 271. 70. In Bradlaugh v. Gossett, (1884) 12 QBD 271 Bradlaugh claimed to make
affirmation instead of taking the oath. He was permitted to make the
affirmation "subject to any liability by statute", and took his seat. Upon an
action for penalties it was decided, finally by the House of Lords, that
Bradlaugh had not qualified himself to sit by making the affirmation. On re-
election, he attempted to take the oath, but was prevented by order of the
House which eventually directed the Serjeant to exclude him from the House
until he undertook to create no further disturbance. Bradlaugh then brought
an action against the Serjeant in order to obtain a "declaration that the
order of the House was beyond the power and jurisdiction of the House and
void, and an order restraining the Serjeant at Arms from preventing
Bradlaugh by force from entering the House". It was held that the Court had
no power to restrain the executive officer of the House from carrying out the
order of the House. The reason is that the House is not subject to the
control of the Courts in the administration of the internal proceedings of the
House.
71. If an outside agency illegally prevents a member's participation the
House has the power to secure his presence. In 1543 Ferrers a member was
arrested in London. The House, on hearing of his arrest, ordered the
Serjeant to go to the Computer and demand his delivery. The Serjeant was
resisted by the city officers, who were protected by the sheriffs. The
Common s laid their case before the Lords. They ordered the Serjeant to
repair to the sheriffs, and to require the delivery of Ferrers without any writ
or warrant. The Lord Chancellor had offered them a writ of privilege but they
refused it. The sheriffs in the meantime had surrendered the prisoner. This
practice of releasing Members by a writ of Privilege continued but no writ
was to be obtained.
72. The present mode of releasing arrested members goes back to Shirley's
case (1 Hatsell, 157). In 1603 Shirley was imprisoned in the Fleet in
execution, before the meeting of Parliament. The Commons first tried to
bring him into the House by habeas corpus, and then sent the Serjeant to
demand his release. The warden refused to give up his prisoner. At length
the warden delivered up the prisoner.
73. As Act 1 James 1.c. 13 was passed which while it recognised the
privilege of freedom from arrest, the right of either House of Parliament to
set a privileged person at liberty, and the right to punish those who make or
procure arrests, enacted that after such time as the privilege of that session
in which privilege is granted shall cease, parties may sue and execute a new
writ. In 1700 an Act was passed which while it maintained the privilege of
freedom from arrest with more distinctness than the Act 1 James I c. 13.
made the goods of privileged persons liable to distress infinite and
sequestration, between a dissolution or prorogation and the next meeting of
Parliament, and during adjournments for more than fourteen days.
74. The composition of Parliament is not dependent on inability of a member
to attend for whatsoever reason. The purpose of Article 85 is to give effect
to the collective right of the House which represents the nation to be called
as often as the situation demands, and in any case the interval between two
sessions must not exceed six months. Assuming a conflict were to arise
between the privileges of member under Article 105(3) and the functions of
the House to assemble under Article 85 the privilege of the member will not
prevail. The detention of members of Parliament is by a statutory authority
in the exercise of his statutory powers.
75. The suspension under Article 359 of the remedy for the enforcement of
fundamental rights is dependent on a Proclamation of Emergency under
Article 352. Parliament has the power not to approve of the Proclamation
and, thereafter the emergency shall cease to operate. The contention of the
respondent means that Parliament cannot meet even so as to withhold
approval of the emergency and thus terminate the suspension of the
members' right of moving the Court. The Constitution provides for
proclamation of emergency, the suspension of the remedy under Article 359
for enforcement of fundamental rights enabling even detention of members
of Parliament when necessary. Article 85 is not suspended. The six months
rule is obligatory. It follows that the members' rights under Article 105 are
not available under a detention in these circumstances. For the purposes of
Article 105(3) a conviction under Penal laws or detention under Emergency
laws must be deemed to be valid till it is set aside.
76. When under Article 359 the President during the operation of a
Proclamation of Emergency by order declares that the right to move any
Court for the enforcement of rights conferred by Part III shall remain
suspended and persons who are members of House of Parliament are in
detention under orders made under the Maintenance of Internal Security
Act, the detention cannot be challenged by collateral attack on the ground of
deprivation of their participation in the Parliamentary proceedings. The
challenge will be questioning the detention on the ground that the detention
is in violation of Articles 19,21 and 22.
77. Article 85 provides that not more than six months shall intervene
between the two Sessions of Parliament. Article 85 is not a provision
regarding the Constitution of Parliament but of holding of Sessions. The
powers, privileges and immunities of Parliament and its members as
provided in Article 105 are that they shall be such as may be defined by
Parliament by law, and, until so, defined, shall be those of the House of
Common s of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
78. In Special Reference No. 1 of (sic) it was held that the court could
entertain a petition under Article 226 on the ground that the imposition of
penalty by the legislature on a person who is not a member of the
legislature or issuing process against such person for its contempt
committed outside the four walls of the House.
79. The scope of the parliamentary privilege of freedom from arrest has
been defined positively and negatively. The positive aspect of the privilege is
expressed in the claim of the Commons to freedom from arrest in all civil
actions or suits during the time of Parliament and during the period when a
member was journeying or returning from Parliament. The privilege has
been defined negatively in the claim of the Commons which specifically
excepted treason, felony and breach of surety of the peace.
80. The privilege of freedom from arrest is limited to civil causes, and has
not been allowed to interfere with the administration of criminal justice or
emergency legislation. (See May's Parliamentary Practice 18th Ed. at p.
100). In early times the distinction between "civil" and "criminal" was not
clearly expressed. The development of the privilege has shown a tendency
to confine it more, narrowly to cases of a civil character and to exclude not
only every kind of criminal case, but also cases which, while not strictly
criminal partake more of a criminal than of a civil character. This
development is in conformity with the principle laid down by the Commons
in a conference with the Lords in 1641 : "Privilege of Parliament is granted
in regard of service of the Commonwealth and is not to be used to the
danger of the Common wealth".
81. In Wilkes' case 19 State Tr., 981 it was resolved by both Houses on 29th
November, 1763 that the privilege of Parliament does not extend to the case
of writing and publishing seditious libels, nor ought to be allowed to obstruct
the ordinary course of the laws in the speedy and effectual prosecution of so
heinous and dangerous an offence. "Since that time" the Committee of
Privileges said in 1831 "it has been considered as established generally, that
privilege, is not claimable for any indictable offence.
82. These being the general declarations of the law of Parliament, the House
will not allow even the sanctuary of its walls to protect a Member from the
process of criminal law, although a service of a criminal process on a
Member within the precincts of Parliament, whilst the House is sitting
without obtaining the leave of the House, would be a breach of privilege.
83. The committal of a Member in England for high treason or any criminal
offence is brought before the House by a letter addressed to the Speaker by
the committing judge or magistrate. Where a Member is convicted but
released on bail pending an appeal, the duty of the Magistrate to
communicate with the Speaker does not arise. No duty of informing the
Speaker arises in the case of a person who while in prison under sentence of
a court is elected as a Member of Parliament. In the case of detention of
Members under Regulation 14-B of the Defence of Realm Regulations in
England, the communication was made to the Speaker by a letter from the
Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland which was read to the
House by the Speaker. The detention of a Member under Regulation 18-B of
the Defence (General) Regulations 1939, made under the Emergency
Powers (Defence) Acts, 1939 and 1940, led to the Committee of Privileges
being directed to consider whether such detention constituted a breach of
the privileges of the House; the Committee reported that there was no
breach of privilege involved. In the case of a member deported from
Northern Rhodesia for non-compliance with an order declaring him to be a
prohibited immigrant, the Speaker held there was no prima facie case of
breach of privilege. (See May's Parliamentary Practice 18th Ed. p. 103).
84. In K. Anandan Nambiar v. Chief Secretary Government of Madras
MANU/SC/0060/1965 : 1966CriLJ586 the petitioners who were members of
Parliament and detained by orders passed by the State Government under
Rule 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962 challenged the validity of
the orders of detention on the ground that Rule 30(1)(b) was not valid
because "a legislator cannot be detained so as to prevent him from
exercising his Constitutional rights as such legislator while the legislative
chamber to which he belongs is in session." The State raised a preliminary
objection that the petitions were incompetent in view of the order issued by
the President under Article 359(1) suspending the rights of any person to
move any Court for the enforcement of rights conferred by Articles 14, 21
and 22. This Court held that the validity of the Act, Rule or order made
under the Presidential Order could not be questioned on the ground that
they contravene Articles 14, 21 and 22.
85. The petitioners also contended in Nambiar's case MANU/SC/0060/1965 :
1966CriLJ586 that Rule 30(1)(b) under which the orders of detention had
been passed was invalid on grounds other than those based on Articles 14,
19, 21 and 22. The Court held that if that plea was well founded, the last
clause of the Presidential Order was not satisfied, and, there fore, the bar
created by it suspending the citizens' fundamental rights under Articles 14,
21 and 22 could not be pressed into service by the respondent.
86. Articles 79, 85, 86, 100(1) and 105(3) were considered in Nambiar's
case MANU/SC/0060/1965 : 1966CriLJ586 in relation to rights of Members
of Parliament, and it was held that the totality of rights cannot claim the
status of fundamental rights and freedom of speech on which reliance was
placed is a part of the privileges falling under Article 105. The reason is that
freedom from arrest under a detention order is not recognised as a privilege
which can be claimed by members of House of Commons in England. This
Court then posed the question that if a claim for freedom from arrest by a
detention order could not be sustained under the privileges of the Members
of Parliament whether it could be sustained on the ground that it is a
Constitutional right which could not be contravened. The statement in May's
Parliamentary Practice 7th Ed. at p. 78 which is to be found in the 18th
Edition at p. 100 that the privilege of freedom from arrest is limited to civil
causes, and has not been allowed to interfere with the administration of
criminal justice or emergency legislation was accepted as the basis of two
propositions laid down in Nambiar's case (supra), First, Articles 79, 85, 86,
100 and 105 cannot be construed to confer any right as such on individual
Members or impose any obligation on them. It is not as if a Member of
Parliament is bound to attend the session, or is under an obligation to be
present in the House when the President addresses it. The context in which
these Articles appear shows that the subject-matter of these Articles is not
the individual rights of the Members of Parliament, but they refer to the
right of the President to issue a summons for the ensuing session of
Parliament or to address the House or Houses. Second, the freedom of
speech to which Article 105 refers would be available to a Member of
Parliament when he attends the session of the Parliament. If the order of
detention validly prevents him from attending a session of Parliament, no
occasion arises for the exercise of the right of freedom of speech and no
complaint can be made that the said right has been invalidly invaded.
87. The second ground of challenge that there was no valid session of the
House cannot be accepted for the reasons given above. It has also to be
stated that it is not open to the respondent to challenge the orders of
detention collaterally. The principle is that what is directly forbidden cannot
be indirectly achieved.
88. The High Court found first that the appellant has to be regarded as a
candidate from 29th December, 1970 as she held herself out on that date as
a candidate. The second finding is that the appellant obtained and procured
the assistance of Yashpal Kapur for the furtherance of her election prospects
when Yashpal Kapur was serving as a Gazetted Officer within the
Government of India. The High Court found that Yashpal Kapur's resignation
from his service though submitted on 13th January, 1971 did not become
effective until 25th January, 1971 when it was notified. The further finding
by the High Court is that Yashpal Kapur under the instructions of the
appellant delivered election speech on 7th January, 1971 at Munshi Gani and
another speech at Kalan on 19th January, 1971. The third finding by the
High Court is that the appellant and her election agent Yashpal Kapur
procured and obtained the assistance of the officers of the State
Government, particularly, the District Magistrate, the Superintendent of
Police, the Executive Engineer. P.W.D. and the Engineer to Hydel Department
for the construction of rostrums and arrangement for supply of power for
loudspeakers at meetings addressed by the appellant on 1st February, 1971
and 25th February, 1971 and further that the said assistance was for
furtherance of the prospects of election of the appellant. The High Court
found the appellant guilty of corrupt practice under Section 123(7) of the
1951 Act. The High Court declared the election of the appellant to be void.
The High Court also held the appellant to be disqualified for a period of six
years from the date of the order.
89. The definition of "candidate" in Section 79(b) of the 1951 Act until the
amendment thereof by the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 was as
follows:
'Candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been
duly nominated as a candidate at any election and any such person
shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the time when,
with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out as a
prospective candidate.
90. This definition has now been substituted by Section 7 of the Amendment
Act, 1975, as follows:
'Candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been
duly nominated as a candidate at any election.
91. Section 10 of the Amendment Act, 1975 further enacted that the
amendments shall have retrospective operation so as to apply to and in
relation to any election held before the commencement of the Amendment
Act, 1975 on 6th August, 1975 to either House of Parliament or to either
House or the House of the Legislature of a State, inter alia, (iv) in respect of
which appeal from any order of any High Court made in any election petition
under Section 98 or Section 99 of the 1951 Act is pending before the
Supreme Court immediately before such commencement.
92. Section 9 of the Amendment Act, 1975 has substituted Clause (a) in
Section 171-A of the Indian Penal Code and a "candidate" means for the
purpose of Section 171-A of the Indian Penal Code a person who has been
nominated as a candidate at any election. Previously the definition of
"candidate" in Section 171-A of the Indian Penal Code was the same as in
Section 79(b) of the 1951 Act prior to the amendment thereof by the
Amendment Act, 1975. In Section 171-A of the Indian Penal Code there was
a proviso to the effect that candidate would mean a person who holds
himself out as a prospective candidate provided he is subsequently
nominated as a candidate.
93. Relying on the provisions introduced by the Amendment Act, 1975, it is
contended on behalf of the appellant that she will be regarded as a
candidate only from 1st February, 1971, namely, the date when she has
been duly nominated as a candidate at her election, and, therefore, the
finding of the High Court cannot be sustained. It is also contended by the
appellant that the finding of the High Court that Yashpal Kapur delivered
election speeches on 7th January, 1971 and 19th January, 1971 under
instructions of the appellant cannot be supported because the appellant was
not a candidate either on 7th January, 1971 or on 19th January, 1971.
94. The second finding by the High Court with regard to the resignation of
Yashpal Kapur not to be effective until 25th January, 1971 is contended to
be displaced by legislative change by the Amendment Act 1975. Section
8(b) of the Amendment Act, 1975 has introduced Explanation (3) at the end
of Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act. This Amendment has retrospective
operation.
95. The Explanation is as follows:
(3) For the purposes of Clause (7), notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law, the publication in the Official Gazette of
the appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or
removal from service of a person in the service of the Central
Government (including a person serving in connection with the
administration of a Union territory) or of a State Government shall
be conclusive proof
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service,
as the case may be, and (ii) where the date of taking effect
of such appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, is
stated in such publication, also of the fact that such person
was appointed with effect from the said date, or in the case
of resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal
from service, such person ceased to be in such service with
effect from the said date.
96. The effect of Explanation (3) at the end of Section 123(7) of the 1951
Act incorporated by the notification dated 25th January, 1971 in the Gazette
dated 6th February, 1971 makes the fact of the resignation of Yashpal Kapur
from his service fully effective from 14th January, 1971. It is, therefore,
contended that from 14th January, 1971 Yashpal Kapur was not a
Government servant.
97. To constitute a corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123(7) of
the 1951 Act the act complained of must be an act of obtaining or procuring
of assistance of the categories of Government servants mentioned therein
by the candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the
consent of the candidate or his election agent. Section 100(1)(b) of the
1951 Act enacts that if the High Court is of opinion that any corrupt practice
has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or by any
other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent,
the High Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be
void. A returned candidate is defined in Section 79(f) of the 1951 Act to
mean a candidate whose name has been published under Section 67 of the
1951 Act as duly elected. A returned candidate in order to be guilty of a
corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act must
be guilty of any of the acts mentioned in the different sub-sections of
Section 123 as a candidate. The appellant contends that the appellant was
not a candidate on 7th January, 1971 or 19th January, 1971 and there could
not be any procuring or obtaining of any assistance by the appellant as a
candidate or by anybody else with the consent of the appellant. All the sub-
sections of Section 123 of the 1951 Act refer to the acts of a candidate or
his election agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or
his election agent. The present definition of "candidate" which has
retrospective effect is con tended to exclude completely acts by candidate
prior to the date he is nominated as a candidate.
98. The third finding by the High Court that the appellant and her election
agent Yashpal Kapur procured and obtained the assistance of the officers of
the State Government, particularly, the District Magistrate, the
Superintendent of Police, the Executive Engineer, P.W.D. and the Engineer to
Hydel Department for construction of rostrums and arrangement for supply
of power for loudspeakers and for their assistance for furtherance of the
prospects of the election of the appellant has to be tested in the light of the
provisions contained in Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act. Under the said
provision obtaining or procuring by candidate or his agent any assistance for
the furtherance of the prospect of that candidate from Gazetted Officers is
corrupt practice. The Amendment Act, 1975 by Section 8 thereof has added
a proviso to Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act. The proviso is as follows:
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the discharge or
purported discharge of his official duty makes any arrangements or
provides any facilities or does any other act or thing for, to, or in
relation to any candidate or his agent or any other person acting
with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, (whether by
reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason),
such arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to
be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate's election.
99. The proviso aforesaid shows that where persons in the service of the
Government in the discharge of official duty make any arrangement or
provide any facility or do any act or thing in relation to a candidate, such
arrangements and facilities shall not be deemed to be assistance for
furtherance of the prospect of the candidate's election. therefore, the
service rendered by Government servants for construction of rostrums and
arrangements for supply of power for loudspeakers according to the
contention of the appellant could not be considered as assistance for the
furtherance of the prospects of the election of the appellant.
100. The contentions of the appellant can succeed if the Amendment Acts of
1974 and 1975 are valid. The respondent has challenged the Constitutional
validity of these Acts. therefore, that question has to be examined before
the appellant's contentions can be answered.
101. The respondent in cross-appeal challenged the findings of the High
Court on issue No. 9 and contended that the High Court should have held
that the election expenses of the appellant exceeded the limit. The
respondent also challenged the finding of the High Court with regard to
issue No. 6 and contended that the High Court should have held that the
symbol of cow and calf was a religious symbol and the appellant committed
corrupt practice as defined in Section 123(3) of the 1951 Act. The
respondent did not press issues Nos. 4 and 5 which related to distribution of
quilts, blankets, dhoties and liquor. The respondent also abandoned Issue
No. 7 which related to voters being conveyed to the polling stations free of
charge on vehicles hired and procured by Yashpal Kapur.
102. The issue pressed by the respondent was that the appellant and her
election agent Yashpal Kapur incurred or authorised expenditure in excess of
the amount prescribed by Section 77 of the 1951 Act read with Rule 90. The
respondent alleged that the election expenses of the appellant, inter alia,
were Rs. 1,28,700 on account of hiring charges of vehicles, Rs. 43,230/- on
account of cost of petrol and diesel; Rs. 9,900/- on account of payment
made to the drivers of the vehicles. The respondent further alleged that the
appellant spent Rs. 1,32,000/- on account of construction of rostrums for
public meetings on 1st February, 1971 and 25th February, 1971. The
respondent contended that the findings of the High Court should be
reversed.
103. The High Court found that the election expenses furnished by the
appellant were Rs. 12,892.97. The High Court added another sum of Rs.
18,183.50. The three items which were added by the High Court were cost
of erection of rostrums amounting to Rs. 16,000/, cost incurred in
installation of loudspeakers amounting to Rs. 1,951 / - and cost for
providing car transport to respondent No. 1 amounting to Rs. 232.50. The
total election expenses found by the High Court came to Rs. 31,976.47
which was below the prescribed limit of Rs. 35,000/-.
104. With regard to hiring charges of vehicles the High Court found that the
respondent did not examine any witness to indicate as to whether the
vehicles were used only for party propaganda or they were used in
connection with the election of the appellant. The High Court further found
that the documents which were relied on by the respondent did not establish
that the vehicles had been engaged or used in connection with the election
work of the appellant.
105. The respondent repeated the following contentions which had been
advanced before the High Court. Dal Bahadur Singh, President, District
Congress Committee wrote a letter to the District Election Officer intimating
that 23 vehicles had been engaged by the District Congress Committee for
election work in Rae Bareli, Amethi and Ram Sanehi Ghat constituencies,
and, therefore, the vehicles should be derequisitioned. Dal Bahadur Singh
thereafter wrote a note to Yashpal Kapur and requested that the letter be
sent to the District Election Officer to that effect. Yashpal Kapur wrote a
letter to the District Election Officer and repeated the prayer contained in
Dal Bahadur Singh's letter. It was, therefore, contended that because
Yashpal Kapur was the election agent of the appellant and he moved for the
derequisition of the vehicles it should be inferred that the vehicles were
engaged for the election of the appellant. Yashpal Kapur said that the
vehicles were used in the three Parliamentary constituencies. The High
Court rightly held that the evidence did not establish that the vehicles had
been used for the election work of the appellant. The High Court also
correctly found that there was no evidence to show that Yashpal Kapur
made any propaganda from the vehicles in any manner for the purpose of
the election.
106. With regard to the expenses for the erection of rostrums the
respondent contended that the appellant's election expenses should include
Rs. 1,32,000/- as the costs for erection of rostrums for the meetings on 1st
February, 1971 and the meeting on 25th February, 1971. The High Court
held that Rs. 16,000/- could only be added to the election expenses of the
appellant consisting of Rs. 6,400/- for four rostrums and Rs. 9,600/- for six
rostrums.
107. The amount of Rs. 16,000/- which was added by the High Court on
account of cost of erection of rostrums cannot be included in the election
expenses of the appellant by reason of amendment to Section 77 of the
1951 Act by the Amendment Act, 1975, Explanation 3 has been added as
follows:
For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that any expenditure
incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided or
any other act or thing done by any person in the service of the
Government and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in
Clause (7) of Section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of
the official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not
be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his election agent for
the purposes of this sub-section.
108. By the Amendment Act, 1975 a proviso has been added to Section
123(7) of the 1951 Act to the effect that arrangements made or facilities
provided or any act done by a Government servant belonging to the class
mention ed there in the discharge of official duty shall not be deemed to be
assistance for furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election. All
these amendments have retrospective operation. therefore, the cost of
rostrums cannot be added to the election expenses of the appellant.
Services rendered by Government servants for the reaction of rostrums and
for supply of power for loudspeakers cannot be deemed to be assistance for
the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election.
109. The respondent contended that Exhibit 118 which was the Bank
account of the District Congress Committee showed on the one hand that
there was deposit of Rs. 69,930/- on 4th March, 1971 and on the other
there was a withdrawal of Rs. 40,000/- on 4th March, 1971 and of Rs.
25,000/- on 6th March, 1971, and, therefore, the sum of Rs. 65,000/-
should be added to the election expenses of the appellant. When it was put
to Yashpal Kapur that the sums of Rs. 40,000/- and Rs. 25,000/- were
withdrawn by Dal Bahadur Singh. Yashpal Kapur said that he was not aware
of it. There is no pleading in the election petition that the appellant
authorised incurring expenditure by a political party. There is no pleading
that any amount has been paid by the political party. There is no complaint
in the petition about the sum of Rs. 65,000/- or the sum of Rs. 69,930/-
Yashpal Kapur denied knowledge of Rs. 70,000/-. The appellant was not
asked a single question. There is no evidence to identify any of these
payments with the election of the appellant.
110. It is appropriate at this stage to refer to the amendment which was
introduced by the Amendment Act, 1974. The appellant relies on the
provision to show that expenses incurred or authorised by a political party
cannot be included in election expenses. Explanation I which was inserted at
the end of Section 77 of the 1951 Act by Amendment Act, 1974 is that any
expenditure incurred or authorised in connection with the election of a
candidate by a political party or by any other association or body of persons
or by an individual other than the candidate or his election agent shall not
be deemed to be and shall not ever be deemed to have been expenditure in
connection with the election incurred or authorised by the candidate or by
his election agent.
111. A proviso was also added to the aforesaid Explanation I by the
Amendment Act, 1974. The proviso stated that nothing contained in the
Explanation shall affect (a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme
Court whereby the election of a candidate to the House of the People or to
the Legislative Assembly of a State has been declared void or set aside
before the commencement of the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1974; (b) any judgment, order or decision of a
High Court whereby the election of any such candidate has been declared
void or set aside before the commencement of the said Ordinance if no
appeal has been preferred to the Supreme Court against such judgment,
order or decision of the High Court before such commencement and the
period of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before such
commencement.
112. Explanation 2 which was added to Section 77 of the 1951 Act by the
Amendment Act, 1974 is as follows:
For the purposes of Explanation I "political party" shall have the
same meaning as in the Election Symbols (Reservation and
Allotment) Order, 1968, as for the time being in force.
113. Counsel for the respondent relied on the recent decision of this Court in
Kanwar Lal Gupta v. Amarnath Chawla MANU/SC/0277/1974 :
[1975]2SCR259 in support of the proposition that there has been no change
in law and if expenses incurred by a political party can be identified with the
election of a candidate then that expenditure is to be added to the election
expenses of a candidate as being authorised by him. There are no findings
by the High Court in the present appeals that any expenses by a political
party were authorised by the appellant. There is also no finding in the
present appeals that any expenses incurred by a political party can be
identified with the election of the appellant. The changes in law effected by
the Amendment Acts, 1974 and 1975 totally repel the submissions on behalf
of the respondent. Expenses incurred or authorised in connection with the
election of a candidate by a political party shall not be deemed to be and
shall not ever be deemed to have been expenditure in connection with the
election incurred or authorised by the candidate. Furthermore, the ruling in
Kanwar Lal Gupta's case (supra) is no longer good law because of the
legislative changes.
114. Counsel for the respondent contended that the judgment of the High
Court should be reversed with regard to election expenses of the appellant
on three counts. First, Exhibit 118 shows that the sum of Rs. 65,000/- which
was drawn by the Congress Committee should have been held by the High
Court on a reasonable inference to have been spent by the District Congress
Committee as having been authorised by the election agent of the appellant.
Second, the High Court has not taken into account expenses of the election
agent at 12 meetings other than the meetings addressed by the appellant
and has also not taken into account the telephone expenses of the election
agent. The telephone expenses amounted to Rs. 836.85 between 11th
January, 1971 and 10th February, 1971 and a further sum of Rs. 2,514/- for
the period 11th February, 1971 to 15th March, 1971. Third, it is said that
there were 5000 polling booths and if 20 workers were required per booth
then 10,000 workers would be required and the only inference is that an
amount in excess was spent for workers with the authority of the election
agent.
115. In Issue No. 9 there was no amount alleged with regard to telephone
bills or election meetings under the heading of alleged election expenses.
There was no allegation to that effect in the petition. With regard to
expenses for the alleged 12 meetings addressed by the election agent the
evidence of Yashpal Kapur is that he addressed about a dozen meetings and
he did not include in the election return the expenses incurred for
installation of loudspeakers because the expenditure was not incurred by
him. He also said that he did not include in the election return the expends
incurred over the construction of platforms because the meetings were
arranged by the District Congress Committee. No allegations were made in
the petition with regard to any alleged sum of money on account of election
meetings were the election agent spoke. The High Court rightly said that the
telephone expenses and expenses for meetings could not be taken into
consideration because no suggestion of the case was made until the stage of
arguments.
116. The respondent's submission is that the appellant was the Prime
Minister at the time of the election, and, therefore, there was a big
campaign and the expenses were enormous. That will mean little. Expenses
incurred or authorised by a political party are under the Amendment Act,
1974 not to be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent for the
purposes of Section 77 of the 1951 Act. The part played by a political party
in connection with candidates of the party at the election particularly in
relation to expenditure incurred by the political party with regard to
candidates of the party has been the subject of some decisions of this Court.
This Court has observed that expenditure must be by the candidate himself
and any expenditure in his interest by others (not his agent within the
meaning of the term of the Election Laws) is not to be taken note of. Where
vehicles were engaged by the Congress Committee and used by the
candidate, the amount spent by the Congress Committee could not be taken
to be included in the expenditure of the candidate's election expenses (See
Hans Raj v. Pt. Hari Ram (1968) 40 Ele LR 125.
117. Expenses incurred by a political party in support of its candidates have
been held by this Court not to fall within the mischief of Section 123(6) of
the 1951 Act (See Shah Jayantilal Ambalal v. Kasturilal Nagindas Doshi
(1969) 42 Ele LR 307. In Rananjaye Singh v. Baijnath Singh
MANU/SC/0091/1954 : [1955]1SCR671 this Court pointed out that
expenses must be incurred or authorised by the candidate or his agent. In
that case the Mangaer, the Assistant Manager, 20 Ziladars and their peons
were alleged to have worked for the election of the appellant. This Court
held that the employment of extra persons and the incurring or authorising
of extra expenditure was not by the candidate or his election agent. The
extra men employed and paid were in the employment of the father of the
appellant. This Court said that the position in law could not be at all different
if the father had given those employees a holiday on full pay and they
voluntarily worked in connection with the election of the appellant. Persons
who volunteer to work cannot be said to be employed or paid by the
candidate or by his election agent. 118. In Ram Dayal v. Brijraj Singh MANU/SC/0269/1969 : [1970]1SCR530 the appellant challenged the election of the respondent on the ground that
the Maharaja and the Rajmata of Gwalior had helped the respondent's
election in a number of ways and acted as his agents and the respondent
incurred considerable expenditure which exceeded the limit. This Court
found that assuming the expenditure was incurred by the Maharaja and the
Rajmata of Gwalior for the purpose of canvassing votes, in the absence of
any evidence to show that the Maharaja and the Rajmata acted as election
agents or that the expenditure was authorised by the respondent, it was not
liable to be included in the election expenses.
119. On behalf of the respondent it was said relying on the decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal Gupta's case MANU/SC/0277/1974 : [1975]2SCR259 that if the candidate takes advantage of expenditure incurred by the political
party in connection with the election of the candidate or participates in the
programme of activity or fails to disavow the expenditure the candidate
cannot escape the rigour of the ceiling by saying that he has not incurred
the expenditure but his political party has done so. Expenditure incurred by
a political party in connection with the election of the candidates of the party
is not a part of the election expenses of the candidate. Similarly,
participation in the programme of activity organised by a political party will
not fall within the election expenses of the candidate of the party. A
candidate is not required to disavow or denounce the expenditure incurred
or authorised by the political party because the expenditure is neither
incurred nor authorised by the candidate. One can disavow what would be
ascribed to be incurred or authorised by one. In the case of expenses of a
political party there is no question of disavowing expenditure incurred or
authorised by the political party.
120. The decision in Kanwar Lal Gupta's case MANU/SC/0277/1974 :
[1975]2SCR259 was based on an observation extracted from the decision of
this Court in Megh Raj Patodia v. R.K. Birla MANU/SC/0322/1970 :
[1971]2SCR118 . In Megh Raj Patodia's case (supra) the allegations were
that the respondent had been put up by one of the wealthiest business
houses in the country which owned or controlled a large number of
companies and during the election campaign vast material and human
resources of these companies were drawn upon by the respondent. This
Court dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellant had failed to
establish that expenditure in excess of the prescribed limit was incurred by
the respondent. In Megh Raj Patodia's case (supra) there is an observation
that expenses incurred by a political party to advance the prospects of the
candidates put up by it without more do not fall within Section 77 of the
1951 Act. The words "something more" were construed by counsel for the
respondent to mean that if a candidate takes advantage of expenditure
incurred or authorised by a political party such expenses could be attributed
to a candidate. The Amendment Act, 1974 has added Explanation 1 to
Section 77 of the 1951 Act which shows that expenditure incurred or
authorised in connection with the election of a candidate by the political
party shall not be deemed to be expenditure incurred or authorised by the
candidate or his election agent.
121. Allegations that election expenses are incurred or authorised by a
candidate or his agent will have to be proved. Authorisation means
acceptance of the responsibility. Authorisation must precede the
expenditure. Authorisation means reimbursement by the candidate or
election agent of the person who has been authorised by the candidate or
by the election agent of the candidate to spend or incur. In order to
constitute authorisation the effect must be that the authority must carry
with it the right of re-imbursement.
122. For the foregoing reasons the contentions of the respondent that the
appellant exceeded the limit of election expenses fail.
123. The respondent contended that the amendments by the Amendment
Acts of 1974 and 1975 are Constitutionally invalid. It may be stated here
that the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975 in Section 5
thereof enacts that in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution after entry 86,
inter alia, the following Entries shall be inserted, namely:
87. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of
1951); the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974
(Central Act 58 of 1974); and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Central Act 40 of 1975). 124. The contention of the respondent is that when the power of amending
the Constitution cannot be exercised to damage or destroy the basic
features of the Constitution or the essential elements of the basic structure
or framework thereof the limitations on the exercise of legislative power will
arise not only from the express limitations contained in the Constitution, but
also from necessary implication either under Articles or even in the
Preamble of the Constitution. This contention on behalf of the respondent is
expanded to mean that if the democratic way of life through Parliamentary
institutions based on free and fair elections is a basic feature which cannot
be destroyed or damaged by amendment of the Constitution, it cannot
similarly be destroyed or damaged by any legislative measure.
125. These reasons were submitted by the respondent. First, the power to
resolve doubts and disputes about the validity of elections of Parliament and
State Legislatures has been vested by the Constitution in the judicial organ
competent to decide election petitions and, therefore, it is not open to the
Legislature to take away and interfere with these exclusive functions of the
judiciary by any legislation amending the law governing the election
adjudicated by the judiciary. Second, the insertion of these Acts in the Ninth
Schedule will not confer any immunity on the legislative measure if basic
features of the Constitution are damaged or destroyed on the ground that
the provisions contravene Part III of the Constitution. Third, any provision in
the legislative measures which has the effect of bringing about unfairness
between different rival candidates in the matter of election is discriminatory
and it not only contravenes Article 14 but also violates the implied limitation
on legislative power relating to free and fair elections. Fourth, any
amendment of the law with retrospective operation governing an election
which has already been held necessarily introduces an element of unfairness
and brings about a denial of equality among rival candidates. Fifth, the
deeming clause introduced in the 1951 Act by Sections 6(b) and 8(a) and
(b) of the" Amendment Act, 1975 and the device of conclusive proof
adopted by Section 8(c) in the Amendment Act, 1975 are unconstitutional
encroachments on judicial power. Sixth, power conferred by an enactment
including a Constitutional enactment has to be so exercised as to give effect
to the guiding principles of the basic norms of that legislation and not so as
to militate against those guiding principles or basic norms.
126. The definition of "candidate" is amended by the Amendment Act, 1975.
The contentions of the respondent on the amendment of the definition of
"candidate" are these. The expression "returned candidate" is descriptive of
the person and the corrupt practices mentioned in Section 123 of the 1951
Act in relation to a candidate will not be confined to corrupt practices
committed with reference to the definition of "candidate". Corrupt practices
alleged in relation to candidates will be relatable to any period and will not
be confined to corrupt practices alleged between the date of nomination and
the date of election. If corrupt practices are committed by candidates who
eventually become returned candidates such corrupt practices will be
offences within the meaning of Section 123 of the 1951 Act without any
reference to the time of commission.
127. Counsel on behalf of the respondent also contended as follows. The
basis of fair and free elections is that the election of a candidate will be
avoided if any corrupt practice has been committed by the candidate by or
with the knowledge and consent of that candidate. The acts of a candidate
may be either anterior to the date of nomination or it may be subsequent to
the date of nomination. therefore, the Amendment Act, 1975 destroys and
damages free and fair election by allowing candidates to commit corrupt
practices prior to the date of nomination.
128. The Amen dment Act, 1975 is also challenged as falling within the vice
of delegated legislation by the amendments inserted as Explanation 3 to
Section 77 of the 1951 Act and the insertion of the proviso to Section
123(7) of the 1951 Act. These provisions have already been noticed.
Broadly stated expenditure, incurred by persons in Government service will
not be deemed to be for furtherance of the candidate's election. The
contention are these. No guidelines have been laid down as to what
expenditure can be incurred or what facilities can be made, what acts or
things can be done. Delegation ' cannot include the change of policy. Policy
must be clearly laid down in the Act for carrying into effect the objectives of
the legislation. The legislature must declare the policy. Any duty can be
assigned. Any facility in connection with the election can be asked for by the
party in power to be done for the candidate The official duty opens a wide
power of instructions to Government servants who may be asked to assist
candidates by canvassing, influencing which will damage fair elections.
129. The device of conclusive proof which is introduced to add Explanation 3
to Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act with regard to the date with effect from
which the person ceased to be in service is said to be an encroachment on
judicial power.
130. Section 8(a) of the Amendment Act, 1975 which adds a proviso to
Section 123 of the 1951 Act to the effect that no symbol allotted under this
Act to a candidate shall be deemed to be a religious symbol or a national
symbol for the purposes of this clause is attacked as legalising religious
symbols and thus offending secularism.
131. Section 10 of the Amendment Act, 1975 which enacts that the
amendments shall have retrospective effect is challenged as retrospectively
legalising a void election. These submissions are made. If this power is
upheld there can be a legislative measure to avoid valid elections. The
distinction between law abiding persons and lawless persons is eliminated.
One person has not been given the opportunity of spending money at the
time of election but the other is retrospectively given the advantage of
spending in excess and thereafter of avoiding the effect of excess expenses
by validation.
132. The contentions on behalf of the respondent that ordinary legislative
measures are subject like Constitution amendments to the restrictions of not
damaging or destroying basic structure, or basic features are utterly
unsound. It has to be appreciated at the threshold that the contention that
legislative measures are subject to restrictions of the theory of basic
structures or basic features is to equate legislative measures with
Constitution amendment. The hierarchical structure of the legal order of a
State is that the Constitution is the highest level within national law. The
Constitution in the formal sense is a 'solemn document containing a set of
legal norms which may be changed only when special prescriptions are
observed. The purpose of special prescriptions is to render the change of
these norms more difficult by regulating the manner and form of these
amendments. The Constitution consists of those rules which regulate the
creation of the general legal norms, in particular, the creation of statutes. It
is because of the material Constitution that there is a special form for
Constitutional law. If there is a Constitutional form then Constitution laws
must be distinguished from ordinary laws. The material Constitution may
determine not only the organs and procedure of legislation, but also, to
some degree the contents of future laws. The Constitution can negatively
determine that the laws must not have a certain content e.g. that the
Parliament may not pass any statute which restricts religious freedom. In
this negative way not only contents of statutes but of the other norms of
legal order, judicial and administrative decisions likewise, may be
determined by the Constitution. The Constitution can also positively
prescribe certain contents of future statutes. This may be illustrated with
reference to the provisions in Article 22 that no person who is arrested shall
be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be of the
grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be
defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
133. Articles 245 and 246 give plenary powers to legislatures to legislate.
The only question is whether any provision of the Constitution is violated.
The power of plenary body is not to be construed like the power of a
delegate. The largest kind of power will be attributed to legislature. The only
prohibition is with reference to the provisions of the Constitution. The
Constitution is the conclusive instrument by which powers are affirmatively
created or negatively restricted. The only relevant test for the validity of a
statute made under Article 245 is whether the legislation is within the scope
of the affirmative grant of power or is forbidden by some provision of the
Constitution.
134. To accept the basic features or basic structures theory with regard to
ordinary legislation would mean that there would be two kinds of limitations
for legislative measures. One will pertain to legislative power under Articles
245 and 246 and the legislative entries and the provision in Article 13. The
other would be that no legislation can be made as to damage or destroy
basic features or basic structures. This will mean rewriting the Constitution
and robbing the legislature of acting within the framework of the
Constitution. No legislation can be free from challenge on this ground even
though the legislative measure is within the plenary powers of the
legislature.
135. The theory of implied limitations on the power of amendment of the
Constitution has been rejected by seven Judges in Kesavananda Bharati's
case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . Our Constitution has not
adopted the due process clause of the American Constitution.
Reasonableness of legislative measures is unknown to our Constitution. The
crucial point is that unlike the American Constitution where rights are
couched in wide general terms leaving it to the Courts to evolve necessary
limitations our Constitution has denied due process as a test of invalidity of
law. In A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras MANU/SC/0012/1950 :
1950CriLJ1383 due process was rejected by clearly limiting the rights
acquired and by eliminating the indefinite due process. Our Constitution
contemplates that considerations of justice or general welfare might require
restriction on enjoyment of fundamental rights.
136. The theory of basic structures or basic features is an exercise in
imponderables. Basic structures or basic features are indefinable. The
legislative entries are the fields of legislation. The pith and substance
doctrine has been applied in order to find out legislative competency, and
eliminate encroachment on legislative entries. If the theory of basic
structures or basic features will be applied to legislative measures it will
denude Parliament and State legislatures of the power of legislation and
deprive them of laying down legislative policies. This will be encroachment
on the separation of powers.
137. The Constitutional validity of a statute depends entirely on the
existence of the legislative power and the express provision in Article 13.
Apart from the limitation the legislature is not subject to any other
prohibition. The amendments made to the 1951 Act by the Amendment
Acts, 1974 and 1975 are to give effect to certain views expressed by this
Court in preference to certain views departed from or otherwise to clarify
the original intention. It is within the powers of Parliament to frame laws
with regard to elections. Parliament has power to enumerate and define
election expenses Parliament has power to lay down limits on election
expenses. Parliament has power to state whether certain expenses can be
included or may be excluded from election expenses. Parliament has power
to adopt conclusive proof with regard to matters of appointment resignation
or termination of service. Parliament has power to state what can be
considered to be office of profit. Parliament has power to state as to what
will and what will not constitute corrupt practice. Parliament has power to
enact what will be the ground for disqualification. Parliament has power to
define "candidate". Parliament has power to state what symbols will be
allotted to candidates at election. These are all legislative policies.
138. The conclusive evidence or conclusive proof clause is an accepted
legislative measure. Similarly, giving retrospective effect to legislative
amendment is accepted to be valid exercise of legislative power. The well-
known pattern of all Validation Acts by which the basis of judgments or
orders of competent Courts and Tribunals is changed and the judgments and
orders are made ineffective is to be found in M.P.V. Sundaramier & Co. v. The State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0151/1958 : [1958]1SCR1422 . The power of the legislature to pass a law includes a power to pass it
retrospectively. An important illustration with reference to retrospective
legislation in regard to election is the decision of this Court in Kanta Kathuria's case MANU/SC/0275/1969 : [1970]2SCR835 . Kanta Kathuria was disqualified by reason of holding an office of profit. First the Ordinance
and later the Act was passed to nullify the decision of the High Court. The
Ordinance as well as the Act stated that notwithstanding any judgment or
order of any Court or Tribunal, the officer shall not be disqualified or shall be
deemed never to have disqualified the holders thereof as a member of the
Legislative Assembly. The rendering of a judgment ineffective by changing
the basis by legislative enactment is not encroachment on judicial power
because the legislation is within the competence of the legislature.
139. A contention was advanced that the legislative measure could not
remove the disqualification retrospectively because the Constitution
contemplates disqualification existing at certain time in accordance with law
existing at that time. One of the views expressed in that case is that Article
191 recognises the power of the Legislature of the State to declare by law
that the holder of the office shall not be disqualified for being chosen as a
Member. Power is reserved to the Legislature of the State to make the
declaration. There is nothing in the Article to indicate that this declaration
cannot be made with retrospective effect. The Act was held not to be
ineffective in its retrospective operation on the ground that it is well
recognised that Parliament and State Legislatures can make their laws
operate retrospectively. Any law that can be made prospectively can be
made with retrospective operation. It is said that certain kinds of laws
cannot operate retrospectively. That is ex-post facto legislation, The present
case does not fall within that category. Reference may be made to May's
Parliamentary Practice 17th Ed. p. 515 where , instances are given of
validation of election by the British Parliament.
140. This Court in Jumuna Prasad Mukhariya v. Lachhi Ram
MANU/SC/0104/1954 : [1955]1SCR608 rejected the contention advanced
there that Sections 123(5) and 124(5) of the 1951 Act interfered with a
citizen's fundamental right to freedom of speech. This Court said that these
laws do not stop a man from speaking. They merely prescribe conditions
which must be observed if one wants to enter Parliament. The right to stand
as a candidate and to contest an election is not a common law right. It is a
special right created by statute which can only be exercised on the
conditions laid down by the statute. The Fundamental Rights Chapter has no
bearing on a right like this created by a statute relating to election.
141. The contention on behalf of the respondent that the amendment of the
definition of "candidate" has damaged or destroyed basic structure is
untenable. There is no basic structure or basic feature or basic framework
with regard to the time when under the Election Laws a person is a
candidate at the election. The contention of the respondent that the
expression "returned candidate" is descriptive of the expression "candidate"
will rob Section 100 of its content. The word "candidate" in relation to
various electoral offences shows that he must be a candidate at the time of
the offence. Time is necessary for fixing the offences. A significant
distinction arises between the electoral offences under the 1951 Act and the
offences under Sections 171-A to 171-1 of the Indian Penal Code namely
that the 1951 Act uses the word "candidate" or his election agent with
reference to various offences, whereas the Indian Penal Code does not use
the word "candidate" in relation to commission of any offence. Any person
may fall within the offences of bribery, undue influence, personation at
elections within the provisions of the Indian Penal Code or for false
statement or illegal payments in connection with any election or failure to
keep election accounts.
142. The English Representation of the People Act, 1949 called the English
Act was relied on by the respondent to show that the word "candidate" in
the 1951 Act should have the same meaning as in the English Act and there
should be no limitation as to time in relation to a candidate. "Candidate" is
defined in Section 103 of the English Act in relation to Parliamentary election
to mean a person who is elected to serve in Parliament or a person who is
nominated as a candidate at the election or is declared by himself or by
others to be a candidate on or after the day of the issue of the writ for the
election or after the dissolution or vacancy in consequence of which the writ
was issued. The electoral offences under the English Act speak of a person
to be guilty of corrupt practices of bribery as mentioned in Section 99, of
treating as mentioned in Section 100 and of undue influences as mentioned
in Section 101 of the English Act. These sections in the English Act speak of
a person and do not use the expression "candidate".
143. Where a candidate is elected the English definition gives no
commencing date as from which his candidature has commenced; whereas,
if he be not elected, he is not a candidate until he has been nominated, or is
declared to be a candidate on or after the dissolution or vacancy. A
candidate who is elected is accordingly a "candidate" as soon as he has
entered upon his election campaign, and has made it known that he intends
to present himself as a candidate at the ensuing election, he may thus
become a candidate before the dissolution of Parliament, and may be
unseated for bribery or treating committed months or even years before the
vacancy or election, for such acts are offences at common law. With respect
to illegal practices, which are purely statutory offences, it would seem that a
narrower construction will prevail, and that a candidate will not be held
responsible for payments etc., made before he is a candidate in point of
fact, and which payments only become illegal practices by reason of his
subsequently becoming a candidate (see Parker's Conduct of Parliamentary
Elections 1970 Ed. 52.
144. It has been held in England that a candidate may be unseated for
bribery or treating committed months or even years before the vacancy or
election (Youghal 1 OM. & H. 295; Bodmin 5 OM & H 230. The present
position under the English Act is stated in Parker's Conduct of Parliamentary
Elections 1970 Ed. 30 to be that since the corrupt practice under
consideration is purely a statutory offence, which only becomes a corrupt
practice by reason of the person in whose support the prohibited expenses
were incurred subsequently becoming a candidate, the candidate may not
be held responsible. In Norwich (1886) 54 LT 625 the question was
considered in relation to the responsibility of a candidate for payments
which only became illegal practices by reason of his subsequently becoming
a "candidate" as defined by statute and it was held that he was not liable.
The liability of a candidate under the English Act, particularly, with regard to
election expenses as laid down in Section 63 of the English Act is regarded
as open to doubt until the point is settled by the decision of an election
court.
145. Sections 171-A to 171-1 of the Indian Penal Code and the provisions
contained in Sections 125 to 136 of the 1951 Act follow the pattern of
English Acts, namely, Statutes 17 and 18 Victoria. Chapter CII (1853-54);
Statutes 21 and 22 Victoria, Chapter LXXXVII (1858) and Statutes 46 and
47 Victoria Chapter LI (1882). These English Statutes make certain acts
punishable as corrupt practice when they relate to persons other than
candidates or voters. Section II of 17 and 18 Victoria Chapter CI enacts that
the persons mentioned therein shall be deemed guilty of bribery and
punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The words used
there are "every person" who shall do the acts mentioned therein shall be
punishable. In these sections dealing with the acts of persons other than
candidates and voters no time is mentioned. On the other hand, Section IV
of Statutes 17 and 18 Victoria Chapter CII makes certain acts of voters and
candidates corrupt practice. Section IV of the aforesaid English Statute
enacts that every candidate at an election who shall corruptly by himself, or
by or with any person or by any other ways or means on his behalf, at any
time, either before, during, or after any election, directly or indirectly give
or provide, or cause to be given or provided any expenses incurred for any
meat, drink entertainment, etc. shall be deemed guilty of an offence of
treating. In these sections when the acts of voters and candidates are made
punishable the words used are "before or during any election directly or
indirectly or at any time either before, during or after any election" in
Section IV of the Act. These words make acts of voters or candidates
committed before or during an election also corrupt practice. Without these
words acts of the candidate made punishable under the English Statutes
would only be the acts committed by the candidate after he becomes a
candidate.
146. The 1951 Act uses the expression "candidate" in relation to several
offences for the purpose of affixing liability with reference to a person being
a candidate. If not time be fixed with regard to a person being a candidate it
can be said that from the moment a person is elected he can be said to hold
himself out as a candidate for the next election. The definition in the English
Act cannot be of any aid to the construction of the 1951 Act.
147. The contention of the respondent is that if a candidate is free to spend
as much as a candidate likes before the date of nomination a great premium
would be placed on free use of money before the date of nomination. The
1951 Act specifies what election expenses are of a candidate. The statute
specifies time in regard to a candidate. That time cannot be enlarged or
reduced. The holding out by a person of candidature was a flexible and
elastic idea. The date of nomination is definite and doubtless. Different
views may be taken as to the time of holding out. The legislature has now
set the matter at rest.
148. The word "incur" according to the dictionary meaning means to
become liable to. The word "incur" means undertake the liability even if the
actual payment may not be made immediately. The undertaking of the
responsibility for the expenditure concerned may be either by the candidate
or his election agent. Again, a candidate is also to be deemed responsible
for the expenditure if he has authorised a particular expenditure to be made
by someone else on his behalf.
149. The contention on behalf of the respondent is that the Amendment
Acts of 1974 and 1975 fall within the vice of delegated legislation because
there are no guiding principles with regard to official duty or nature of
expenditure in Explanation 3 to Section 77 of the 1951 Act and in the
proviso to Section 123(7) of the 1951 Act. Official duty will be a duty in law.
Official duty will be duty under administrative directions of the Executive.
Official duty will be for security, law and order, and matters in aid of public
purpose. These duties will be in connection with election. To illustrate,
Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code speaks of official duty.
150. This Court in Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari MANU/SC/0071/1955 :
[1955]28ITR941(SC) 44 interpreted the words "official duty" to have
reasonable connection between the act and the discharge of duty. The act
must bear such relation to the duty that the person could lay a reasonable
claim, but not a pretended fanciful claim, that he did it in the course of the
performance of his duty. Where a power is conferred or a duty imposed by
statute or otherwise, and there is nothing said expressly inhibiting the
exercise of the power or the performance of the duty by any limitation s or
restrictions, it is reasonable to hold that it carries with it the power of doing
all such acts or employing such means as are reasonably necessary for such
execution, because it is a rule that when the law commands a thing to be
done, it authorises the performance of whatever may be necessary for
executing its command.
151. There is no vice of delegation in the Statutes. "Delegation is not the
complete handing over or transference of a power from one person or body
of persons to another. Delegation may be defined as the entrusting by a
person or body of persons, of the exercise of a power residing in that person
or body of persons to another person or body of persons. With complete
power of revocation or amendment remaining in the grantor or delegator. It
is important to grasp the implications of this, for, much confusion of thought
has unfortunately resulted from assuming that delegation involves or may
involve, the complete abdication or abrogation of a power. This is precluded
by the definition. Delegation often involves the granting of discretionary
authority to another, but such authority is purely derivative. The ultimate
power always remains in the delegator and is never renounced". (See
Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg. (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. v. The Asstt. Commr. of Sales Tax
MANU/SC/0361/1973 : [1974]94ITR204(SC) .
152. The Constitution 29th Amendment Act was considered by this Court in
Kesavananda Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . The
29th Amendment Act inserted in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution
Entries 65 and 66 being the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1969 and the Kerala
Land Reforms Act, 1971. This Court unanimously upheld the validity of the
29th Amendment Act. The unanimous view of this Court in Kesavananda
Bharati's case (supra) is that Article 31-B is not open to challenge. Six
Judges held that the 29th Amendment Act would be ineffective to protect
the impugned Act is they took away the fundamental rights. Six Judges took
the view that the 29th Amendment Act is valid and further that Article 31-B
has been held by this Court to be independent of Article 32-A and that
Article 31-B protects Scheduled Acts and Regulations and none of the
Scheduled Acts and Regulations is deemed to be void or ever to have
become void on the ground of contravention of any fundamental rights.
Article 31-B gives a mandate and complete protection from the challenge of
fundamental rights to the Scheduled Acts and Regulations. The view of
seven Judges in Kesavananda Bharati's case is that Article 31-B is a
Constitutional device to place the specified statutes in the Schedule beyond
any attack that these infringe Part III of the Constitution. The 29th
Amendment is affirmed in Kesavananda Bharati's case (supra) by majority
of seven against six Judges.
153. The contentions of the respondent that the Amendment Acts of 1974
and 1975 are subject to basic features or basic structure or basic framework
fails on two grounds. First, legislative measures are not subject to the
theory of basic features or basic structure or basic framework. Second, the
majority view in Kesavananda Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 is that the 29th Amendment which put the two statutes in
the Ninth Schedule and Article 31-B is not open to challenge on the ground
of either damage to or destruction of basic features, basic structure or basic
framework or on the ground of violation of fundamental rights.
154. The symbol allotted to the party of the appellant was characterised by
the respondent as a religious symbol. Under Article 324 the
superintendence, direction and control of elections to Parliament, is vested
in the Election Commission. Rule 5 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961
states that the Election Commission shall by notification in the Gazette of
India and in the Official Gazette of each State, specify the symbols that may
be chosen by candidates at elections in Parliamentary or Assembly
constituencies and the restrictions to which their choice shall be subject.
Rule 10(4) of the 1961 Rules aforesaid states that at an election in a
Parliamentary or Assembly constituency, where a poll becomes necessary,
the returning officer shall consider the choice of symbols, expressed by the
contesting candidates in their nomination papers and shall, subject to any
general or special direction issued in this behalf by the Election Commission
allot a different symbol to each contesting candidate in conformity, as far as
practicable with his choice. It is, therefore, apparent that the power to
specify permissible symbols is vested by Rule 5 in the Election Commission.
The choice of candidates is limited to the symbol specified by the Election
Commission. The Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968
was made in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 328 of the
Constitution read with Rule 5 and Rule 10 of the Conduct of Election Rules
and all other powers enabling in this behalf.
155. Clause 17 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,
1968 provides that the Commission shall by notification in the Gazette of
India publish lists specifying national parties and the symbols respectively
reserved for them etc. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the power of
evolving permissible symbols is exclusively vested in the Election
Commission. It is under their direction that the Returning Officer has to
make allotments and allotments are made in terms of Clauses 5, 6 and 8.
therefore, in the matter of evolving of the permissible symbols, the
jurisdiction is vested in the Election Commission. If a candidate displays in
addition to the allotted symbol an additional symbol which may have a
special appeal on grounds of religion to a particular community, then the
Court will be entitled to go into this question.
156. With regard to the symbol of cow and calf being a religious symbol it
was said on behalf of the respondent that the Akhil Bhartiya Ram Rajya
Parishad asked for cow, calf and milkmaid symbol and were refused. They
were given the symbol of a "Rising sun". It is impossible to hold that
because one party has not been given the symbol of cow, calf and milkmaid,
therefore, the symbol of cow and calf becomes a religious symbol. The High
Court on the evidence adduced by the respondent rightly came to the
conclusion that there was no evidence to prove that the cow and calf is a
religious symbol. The High Court rightly held that cow and calf is not a
religious symbol.
157. The finding of the High Court that the appellant held herself out to be a
candidate from 29th December, 1970 is set aside because the law is that the
appellant became a candidate only with effect from the date of nomination
which was 1st February, 1971. The finding of the High Court that the
resignation of Yashpal Kapur did not become effective until it was notified in
the Gazette is also set aside because under the law the resignation became
effective from 14th January, 1971. The finding of the High Court that the
appellant committed corrupt practice in breach of Section 123(7) of the
1951 Act is also repelled by the legislative changes and is, therefore, set
aside. The order of disqualification of the appellant is also set aside.
158. For the foregoing reasons the contentions of the appellant succeed and
the contentions of the respondent fail. The appeal is accepted. The
judgment of the High Court appealed against is set aside. The cross-
objection of the respondent is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
H.R. Khanna, J.
159. civil Appeal No. 887 of 1975 has been filed by Smt. Indira Nehru
Gandhi (here in after referred to as the appellant) against the judgment of
the Allahabad High Court whereby election petition filed by Shri Raj Narain
respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) to question the
election of the appellant to the Lok Sabha from Rae Bareli Parliamentary
constituency was allowed and the election of the appellant was declared
void. The appellant was found guilty of having committed corrupt practices
under Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
(hereinafter referred to as the RP Act) and as such was stated to be
disqualified for a period of six years in accordance with Section 8-A of the
RP Act. Cross Appeal No. 909 of 1975 has been filed by Shri Raj Narain
against the judgment of the High Court in so far as it decided certain issues
against the respondent.
160. The President of India called upon different constituencies in the
country to elect members to the Lok Sabha by notification dated January
27, 1971 under Section 14(2) of the RP Act. Last date for filing nomination
papers was fixed as February 3, 1971 for Rae Bareli constituency by the
Election Commission. The appellant filed her nomination paper on February
1, 1971. The appellant was for a number of years before the election Prime
Minister of India and is since then continuing to hold that office. Yashpal
Kapur, who was previously a gazetted officer in the Government of India
holding the post of Officer on Special Duty in the Prime Minister's Secretariat
and who subsequently submitted his resignation, was appointed the election
agent of the appellant. The signed form about the appointment of Yashpal
Kapur as election agent was submitted to the Returning Officer of February
4, 1971, the date of scrutiny. The date on which Yashpal Kapur submitted
his resignation and the same became effective is, however, a matter of
controversy between the parties. The appellant, who was a candidate of the
Indian National Congress (R), was allotted the party symbol of cow and calf.
Polling took place in the first week of March on March 1, March 3 and March
5, 1971. The appellant and the respondent were the principal contestants.
There were two other candidates but we are not concerned with them. The
result of the election was declared on March 10, 1971. The appellant got
1,83,309 votes, while the respondent secured 71,499 votes and the former
was declared elected. The respondent thereafter filed election petition on
April 24, 1971 to challenge the election of the appellant. Apart from some
grounds which were not pressed, the election of the appellant was assailed
on the following grounds:
(1) The appellant held herself out as a prospective candidate from
the Rae Bareli constituency immediately after the dissolution of the
Lok Sabha on December 27, 1970, and for furtherance of her
election prospects, she obtained and procured the assistance of
Yashpal Kapur who was at that time holding the post of Officer on
Special Duty. The appellant thus committed corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the RP Act.
(2) The appellant and her election agent procured the assistance of
members of armed forces of the union for furtherance of her
election prospects inasmuch as the members of the armed forces
arranged planes and helicopters of the Air Force at her instance for
her flights to enable her to address meetings in her constituency.
The appellant thereby committed corrupt practice under Section
123(7) of the RP Act.
(3) The appellant and her election agent obtained the assistance of
a number of gazetted officers and members of the police force for
the furtherance of her election prospects in as much as the services
of the District Magistrate, Superintendent of Police Rae Bareli and
the Home Secretary, Uttar Pradesh Government were utilised for
the purposes of the construction of rostrums and installation of
loudspeakers at various places within the constituency where the
appellant addressed her election meetings as also for the purpose
of making arrangements of barricading and posting of police
personnel on the routes by which the appellant was to travel in her
constituency and at the places where she was to address meetings,
in order to give publicity to her visits and thus attract large crowds.
The appellant was thereby stated to have committed corrupt
practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act.
(4) Yashpal Kapur, election agent of the appellant and her other
agents with the consent Yashpal Kapur, freely distributed quilts,
blankets, dhotis and liquor among the voters to induce them to vote
for her and thereby the appellant committed corrupt practice of
bribery under Section 123(1) of the RP Act.
(5) The appellant and her election agent made extensive appeals to
the religious symbol of cow and calf and thereby committed corrupt
practice under Section 123(3) of the RP Act.
(6) Yashpal Kapur and some other persons with his consent hired
and procured a number of vehicles for the free conveyance of
electors to the polling stations and thereby committed corrupt
practice under Section 123(5) of the RP Act.
(7) The appellant and her election agent incurred or authorised
expenditure in contravention of Section 77 of the RP Act and
thereby committed corrupt practice under Section 123(6) of the RP
Act.
161. The appellant in her written statement denied the various allegations
leveled against her and pleaded that Yashpal Kapur resigned from his post
on January 13, 1971 and his resignation was accepted with effect from
January 14, 1971. Notification dated January 25, 1971 was issued by the
Prime Minister's Secretariat in that connection. It was added that P.N.
Haksar, then Secretary to the Prime Minister, told Yashpal Kapur on the
same day on which the resignation was tendered that it was accepted and
that formal orders would follow. Yashpal Kapur became the election agent of
the appellant on February 4, 1971. During the period he was a gazetted
officer in the Government of India, he did not do any work in furtherance of
the appellant's election prospects. Regarding the use of planes and
helicopters of the Air Force, the appellant admitted that oh February 1, 1971
she went by an Indian Air Force plane from Delhi to Lucknow from where
she went by car to Rae Bareli, addressing meetings enroute. It was further
admitted that on February 24, 1971 the appellant went by helicopter of the
Indian Air Force to Gonda on regular party work and that from there she
went by car to Lucknow, Unnao and Rae Bareli addressing public meetings
in several constituencies besides her own. The appellant referred to the Pillai
Committee Report and the Office Memoranda issued by the Government of
India and asserted that the aforesaid flights were made by her in
accordance with them. It was added that under the rules, bills for those
flights were to be paid by the All India Congress Committee and most of
them had already been paid. According to the appellant, neither she nor did
her election agent solicit, require or order the use of Air Force planes and
the Government of India provided the planes as part of their normal duty.
The appellant denied having obtained the assistance of the District
Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police Rae Bareli as also that of the
Home Secretary, U.P. Government for any of the purposes mentioned in the
petition. The appellant in this context referred to the instructions issued by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. She pleaded that
arrangements for posting of police on the routes which she followed and the
arrangements of rostrums were made by the State Government itself in
compliance with those instructions. In regard to the loudspeakers, she
pleaded that those were arranged by the District Congress Committee and
not by the officers of the State Government. It was denied that any
directions or instructions in that regard were issued by the appellant or her
election agent. The allegations regarding the distribution of blankets, dhotis
and liquor were stated to be absolutely false. As regards the Symbol of cow
and calf, the appellant stated that it was not a religious symbol and that it
was wrong that extensive appeals were made by her or her election agent to
that symbol. The appellant added that she and her election agent merely
informed the voters that the symbol of the Indian National Congress (R) was
cow and calf and that the voting mark should be put against that symbol.
The decision of the Election Commission allotting the symbol of cow and calf
to her party was final and the same could not, according to the appellant, be
made a ground of attack nor could the Court go into that question. The
allegation regarding hiring and procuring of vehicles and the use thereof for
conveyance of the voters to the polling stations was described by the
appellant as false. Likewise, she denied the allegation that she or her
election agent incurred expenditure in excess of the prescribed limit.
162. Following issues were framed in the case:
(1) Whether respondent No. 1 obtained and procured the assistance
of Yashpal Kapur in furtherance of the prospects of her election
while he was still a Gazetted Officer in the service of Government of
India? If so, from what date?
(2) Whether at the instance of respondent No. 1 members of the
Armed Forces of the Union arranged Air Force planes and
helicopters for her, flown by members of the Armed Forces, to
enable her to address election meetings on 1-2-1971 and 25-2-
1971, and if so, whether this constituted a corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act?
(3) Whether at the instance of respondent No. 1 and her election
agent Yashpal Kapur, the District Magistrate of Rae Bareli, the
Superintendent of Police of Rae Bareli and the Home Secretary of
U.P. Government arranged for rostrums, loudspeakers and
barricades to be set up and for members of the Police Force to be
posted in connection with her election tour on 1-2-1971 and 25-2-
1971; and if so, whether this amounts to a corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act?
(4) Whether quilts, blankets, dhotis and liquor were distributed by
agents and workers of respondent No. 1, with the consent of her
election agent Yashpal Kapur, at the places and on the dates
mentioned in Schedule A of the Petition in order to induce electors
to vote for her?
(5) Whether the particulars given in paragraph 10 and Schedule A
of the Petition are too vague and general to afford a basis for
allegations of bribery under Section 123(1) of the Representation of
the People Act?
(6) Whether by using the symbol cow and calf, which had been
allotted to her party by the Election Commission in her election
campaign the respondent No. 1 was guilty of making an appeal to
religious symbol and committed a corrupt practice as defined in
Section 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act?
(7) Whether on the dates fixed for the poll voters were conveyed to
the polling stations free of charge on vehicles hired and procured
for the purpose by respondent No. 1's election agent Yashpal Kapur,
or other persons with his consent, as detailed in Schedule B to the
Petition?
(8) Whether the particulars given in paragraph 12 and Schedule B
of the Petition are too vague and general to form a basis for
allegations regarding a corrupt practice under Section 123(5) of the
Representation of the People Act?
(9) Whether respondent No. 1 and her election agent Yashpal Kapur
incurred or authorised expenditure in excess of the amount
prescribed by Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act,
read with Rule 90, as detailed in para 13 of the Petition?
(10) Whether the petitioner had made a security deposit in
accordance with the rules of the High Court as required by Section
117 of the Representation of the People Act?
(11) To what relief, if any, is the petitioner entitled?
Subsequent to the framing of the above issues, the following three
additional issues were framed in pursuance of the judgment of this Court in
an appeal against an interlocutory order of the High Court:
(1) Whether respondent No. 1 obtained and procured the assistant
of Yashpal Kapur in furtherance of the prospects of her election
while he was still a Gazetted Officer in the service of the
Government of India? If so, from what date?
(2) Whether respondent No. 1 held herself out as a candidate from
any date prior to 1-2 1971 and, if so, from what date?
(3) Whether Yashpal Kapur continued to be in the service of
Government of India from and after 14-1-1971 or till which date?
163. During the pendency of the election petition in the High Court, Section
77 of the RP Act was amended by an Ordinance which was subsequently
replaced by Act 58 of 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 1974 amending
Act or Act 58 of 1974). The said amending A inserted two explanations at
the end of Sub-section (1) of Section 77 of the RP Act. The material part of
the explanations reads as under:
Explanation 1-Notwithstanding are judgment, order or decision of
any Court to the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in
connection with the election of candidate by a political party or by
any other association or body of persons or by an individual (other
than the candidate or 1 election agent) shall not be deemed to be,
a shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection
with the election incur or authorized by the candidate or by his elect
agent for the purposes of this sub-section:
Provided Explanation 2.- For the purposes of Explanation 1, 'political
party' shall have the same meaning as in the Election Symbols
(Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as for the being in force.
The above amendment in Section 77 has bearing on the allegation which
was the subject matter of issue No. 9. The respondent filed with petition
challenging the validity of the amending Act.
164. The High Court decided issues 4, 6 and 7 in favour of the appellant and
again the respondent. Issues 5, 8 and 10 were found in favour of the
respondent and against the appellant. On issue No. 9 the finding of the High
Court was that the total amount of expenditure incurred or authorized by
the appellant or he election agent, together with the expenditure proved to
have been incurred by the party or b the State Government in connection
with the appellant's election amounted to Rs. 31,976.4 which was
sufficiently below the prescribed limit of Rs. 35,000. The appellant as such
was he not guilty of any corrupt practice under Section 123(6) of the RP Act.
As the respondent we found to have failed to prove that the expenses of the
appellant or her election agent, together with the expenses found to have
been incurr by the political party and the State Government in connection
with the appellant's election (sic) proceeded the prescribed limit, the High
Court held that no ground had been made out (sic) inquiring into the validity
of the 1974 amendeding Act. The writ petition filed by the respondent was
accordingly dismissed.
165. On additional issue No. 2, the finding of the High Court that the
appellant held herself out as a candidate from the Rae Bareli Parliamentary
constituency on December 29, 1970. Issue No. 3 was decided by the High
Court against the appellant. It was held that the appellant obtained the
assistance of the officers of the U.P. Government, particularly the District
Magistrate, Superintendent of Police, the Executive Engineer PWD and the
Engineer Hydel Department for construction of rostrums and arrangement of
supply of power for loud speakers in the meetings addressed by her on
February 1, 1971 and February 25, 1971 in furtherance of her election
prospects. The appellant, as such, was found guilty of Corrupt practice
under Section 123(7) of the RP Act. On additional issue No. 3, the High
Court found that Yashpal Kapur continued to be in the service of the
Government of India till January 25, 1971, which was the date of the
notification regarding the acceptance of Yashpal Kapur's resignation. The
High Court referred to the fact that according to the notification resignation
of Yashpal Kapur had been accepted with effect from January 14, 1971 and
observed that the order accepting the resignation was passed on January
25, 1971 and till that order was passed the status of Yashpal Kapur
continued to remain that of a Government servant despite the fact that
when that order was passed it was given retrospective effect so as to be
valid from January 14, 1971. As regards issue No. 1 and additional issue No.
1, the High Court held that the appellant obtained and procured the
assistance of Yashpal Kapur during the period from January 7 to 24, 1971
when Yashpal Kapur was still a gazetted officer in the service of the
Government of India in the furtherance of her election prospects.
166. As a result of its findings on issues No. 3, issue No. 1 read with
additional issue No. 1, additional issue No. 2 and additional issue No. 3, the
High Court allowed the petition and declared the election of the appellant to
the Lok Sabha to be void. The appellant was found guilty of having
committed corrupt practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act by having
obtained the assistance of gazetted officers of the U.P. Government, viz., the
District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police Rae Bareli, the
Executive Engineer PWD Rae Bareli and Engineer Hydel Department Rae
Bareli in furtherance of her election prospects. The appellant was further
found guilty of having committed another corrupt practice under Section
123(7) of the RP Act by having obtained the assistance of Yashpal Kapur, a
gazetted officer in the Government of India holding the post of Officer on
Special Duty in Prime Minister's Secretariat, for the furtherance of her
election prospects. The appellant, it was accordingly observed, stands
disqualified for a period of six years from the date of the order in
accordance with Section 8-A of the RP Act. The writ petition as mentioned
earlier, was dismissed.
167. An appeal against the judgment of the learned single Judge of the High
Court dismissing the writ petition is pending before the High Court.
168. During the pendency of these appeals, Parliament passed the Election
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Act 40 of 1975) (hereinafter referred to as
1975 amending Act or Act 40 of 1975) and the same was published in the
Gazette of India Extraordinary dated August 6, 1975. Section 2 of the 1975.
Section 2 of the 1975 amending' Act substituted a new section for Section
8-A in the Act. Accor ding to the new section the case of every person found
guilty of a corrupt practice by an order under Section 99 shall be submitted
as soon as may be, after such order takes effect to the President for
determination of the question as to whether such person shall be
disqualified and if so, for what period not exceeding six years. It is also
provided that the person who stands disqualified may before the expiry of
the period of disqualification submit a petition to the President for the
removal of such disqualification for the unexpired portion of the said period.
The President shall then give his decision on such petition after obtaining
the opinion of the Election Commission and in accordance with such opinion.
Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the 1975 amending Act deal with other consequential
matters relating to disqualification, and it is not necessary for the purpose of
the present case to go into them. Sections 6 and 7 amended Sections 77
and 79 of the RP Act and we shall refer to them presently. Same is the
position of Section 8 of the amending Act which introduced changes in
Section 123 of the RP Act. Section 9 amended Section 171-A of the Indian
Penal Code. Section 10 gives retrospective effect to Sections 6, 7 and 8.
Sections 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Act 40 of 1975 read as under:
6. In Section 77 of the principal Act, in Sub-section (1),
(a) for the words 'the date of publication of the notification
calling the election', the words 'the date on which he has
been nominated' shall be substituted;
(b) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely :
'Explanation 3,- For the removal of doubt, it is hereby
declared that any expenditure in respect of any
arrangements made, facilities provided or any other act or
thing done by any person in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in Clause
(7) of Section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge
of his official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that
clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection
with the election incurred or authorized by a candidate or
by his election agent for the purposes of this sub-section.'
7. In Section 79 of the principal Act, for Clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:
'(b) 'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to
have been duly nominated as a candidate at any election.'
8. In Section 123 of the principal Act,
(a) in Clause (3), the following proviso shall be inserted at
the end, namely :
'Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to
a candidate shall be deemed to be a religious
symbol or a national symbol for the purposes of
this clause.'
(b) in Clause (7), the following proviso shall be inserted at
the end, namely :
'Provided that where any person, in the service of
the Government and belonging to any of the
classes aforesaid, in the discharge or purported
discharge of his official duty, makes any
arrangements or provides any facilities or does any
other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any
candidate or his agent or any other person acting
with the consent of the candidate or his election
agent, (whether by reason of the office held by the
candidate or for any other reason), such
arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be
deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the
prospects of that candidate's election.'.
(c) in the Explanation at the end, the following shall be
added, namely:
(3) For the purposes of Clause (7), notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law, the publication in the Official Gazette of
the appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or
removal from service of a person in the service of the Central
Government (including a person serving in connection with the
administration of a Union territory) or of a State Government shall
be conclusive proof
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, and
(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment,
resignation, termination of service, as the case may be, is
stated in such publication, also of the fact that such person
was appointed with effect from the said date, or in the case
of resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal
from service, such person ceased to be in such service with
effect from the said date.'
9. In the Indian Penal Code, in Section 171-A, for Clause (a), the
following clause shall be substituted, namely:
'(a) 'candidate' means a person who has been nominated
as a candidate at any election,'
10. The amendments made by Sections 6, 7 and 8 of this Act in the
principal Act shall also have retrospective operation so as to apply
to and in relation to any election held before the commencement of
this Act to either House of Parliament or to either House or the
House of the Legislature of a State
(i) in respect of which any election petition may be
presented after the commencement of this. Act; or
(ii) in respect of which any election petition is pending in
any High Court immediately before such commencement;
or
(iii) in respect of which any election petition has been
decided by any High Court before such commencement but
no appeal has been preferred to the Supreme Court against
the decision of the High Court before such commencement
and the period of limitation for filing such appeal has not
expired before such commencement; or
(iv) in respect of which appeal from any order of any High
Court made in any election petition under Section 98 or
Section 99 of the principal Act is pending before the
Supreme Court immediately before such commencement.
169. It is submitted by Mr. Shanti Bhushan on behalf of the respondent that
the amendments made in the RP Act have an impact upon five out of the
seven grounds which were set up by the respondent to assail the election of
the appellant.
170. On August 10,1975 the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975 was published. A number of Constitutional changes were made by the
Constitution Amendment Act. We are, however, concerned with Section 4 of
the Constitutional Amendment Act which inserted Article 329-A in the
Constitution after Article 329. Article 329-A reads as under:
329-A. Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of
Prime Minister and Speaker.- (1) Subject to the provisions of
Chapter II of Part V (Except Sub-clause (e) of Clause (1) of Article
102), no election
(a) to either House of Parliament of a person who holds the
office of Prime Minister at the time of such election or is
appointed as Prime Minister after such election;
(b) to the House of the People of a person who holds the
office of Speaker of that House at the time of such election
or who is chosen as the Speaker for that House after such
election;
shall be called in question, except before such authority (not being
any such authority as is referred to in Clause (b) of Article 329) or
body and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any
law made by Parliament and any such law may provide for all other
matters relating to doubts and disputes in relation to such election
including the grounds on which such election may be questioned.
(2) The validity of any such law as is referred to in Clause (1) and
the decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be
called in question in any court.
(3) Where any person is appointed as Prime Minister or, as the case
may be, chosen to the office of the Speaker of the House of the
People, while an election petition referred to in Clause (b) of Article
329 in respect of his election to either House of Parliament or, as
the case may be, to the House of the People is pending, such
election petition shall abate upon such person being appointed as
Prime Minister or, as the case may be, being chosen to the office of
the Speaker of the House of the People, but such election may be
called in question under any such law as is referred to in Clause (1).
(4) No law made by Parliament before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, in so far as it
relates to election petitions and matters connected therewith, shall
apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to
the election of any such person as is referred to in Clause (1) to
either House of Parliament and such election shall not be deemed to
be void or ever to have become void on any ground on which such
election could be declared to be void or has, before such
commencement, been declared to be void under any such law and
notwithstanding any order made by any court, before such
commencement, declaring such election to be void, such election
shall continue to be valid in all respects and any such order and any
finding on which such order is based shall be and shall be deemed
always to have been void and of no effect.
(5) Any appeal or cross appeal against any such order of any court
as is referred to in Clause (4) pending immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975, before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity
with the provisions of Clause (4).
(6) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything contained in this Constitution.
171. Section 5 of the above Constitution Amendment Act inserted in the
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution a number of enactments including the RP
Act as also Acts 58 of 1974 and 40 of 1975.
172. At the hearing of the appeal Mr. Sen on behalf of the appellant has
relied upon Clause (4) of the new Article 329-A and has contended that that
clause clearly applies to the present case. It is urged that in view of that
clause no law made by Parliament before the coming into force of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, i.e. , before August 10,
1975, in so far as it relates to the election petitions and matters connected
there with shall apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in
relation to the election to the Lok Sabha of the appellant who being Prime
Minister is one of the persons referred to in Clause (1) of that article. It is
further submitted that in view of that clause, the election of the appellant
shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void on any ground
on which such election could be declared to be void or has before such
commencement been declared to be void under any such law. Mr. Sen also
adds that notwithstanding the order made by the High Court before such
commencement declaring the election of the appellant to be void, her
election shall continue to be valid in all respects and any such order and any
finding on which such order is based shall be and shall be deemed always to
have been void and of no effect. Submission is consequently made that in
view of the mandate contained in Clause (5) of the article, the appeal filed
by the appellant and the cross appeal filed by the respondent should be
disposed of in conformity with the provisions of Clause (4).
173. In reply Mr. Shanti Bhushan on behalf of the respondent has not
controverted, and in our opinion rightly, the stand taken by Mr. Sen that
Clause (4) of the article applies to the facts of the present case. He,
however, contends that Section 4 of the Constitution Amendment Act which
has inserted Article 329-A in the Constitution is invalid. The validity of the
above Constitutional amendment has been challenged by Mr. Shanti
Bhushan on the following two grounds:
(1) The above Constitutional amendment affects the basic structure
or framework of the Constitution and is, therefore, beyond the
amending power under Article 368.
(2) The Constitution Amendment Act was passed in a session of
Parliament after some members of Parliament had been
unconstitutionally detained and thus illegally prevented from
influencing the views of other members present at the time the
above Act was passed. This ground, it is urged, also affects the
validity of the amending Act 40 of 1975.
174. Article 329-A deals with election to either House of Parliament of a
person who holds the office of Prime Minister at the time of such election or
is appointed as Prime Minister after such election and to the House of the
People of a person who holds the office of Speaker of that House at the time
of such election or who is chosen as the Speaker for that House after such
election. Accor ding to Clause (1) of Article 329-A, no election of persons
mentioned above shall be called in question, except before such authority or
body and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made
by Parliament. It is made clear that the authority before which such election
shall be called in question would not be the one as is referred to in Clause
(b) of Article 329. The law to be made by Parliament under Clause (1) may
provide for all other matters relating to doubts and dispute in relation to
such election including the grounds on which such election may be
questioned. The above law shall be subject to the provisions of Clause (1) of
Article 102 except Sub-clause (e). The law made under Clause (1) cannot,
therefore, remove the disqualification for being chosen a member of either
House of Parliament because of that person holding an office of profit or
because of his unsoundness of mind or because of his being an
undischarged insolvent or because of his being not a citizen of India, or
because of his having voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State,
or because of his being under any acknowledgment of allegiance or
adherence to a foreign State, as contemplated by Sub-clauses (a) to (d) of
Clause (1) of Article 102 of the Constitution. The law made under Clause (1)
of Article 329-A would not, however, be subject to Clause (e) of Clause (1)
of Article 102, according to which a person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as and for being, a member of either House of Parliament if he is so
disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament, According to Clause
(2) of Article 329-A, the validity of a law referred to in Clause (1) and the
decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be called in
question in any court. Clause (3) provides for the abatement of an election
petition which is pending in respect of the election of any person who is
appointed as Prime Minister or chosen as Speaker of the House of the
People during the pendency of the petition. It is further provided that the
election of such person can be called in question under any such law as is
referred to in Clause (1) of Article 329-A. Clause (4) is the crucial clause for
the present case. Accor ding to this clause, no law made by Parliament
before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment)
Act in so far as it relates to election petitions and matters connected
therewith, shall apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in
relation to the election of any of the persons mentioned above to either
House of Parliament. The remaining part of the clause deals with some
further matters. It is provided in Clause (4) that the election of the aforesaid
person shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void on any
ground on which such election could be declared to be void or has, before
such commencement, been declared to be void under any such law. It is
further provided that notwithstanding any order made by any court before
the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act
declaring such election to be void, such election shall continue to be valid in
all respects and any such order and any finding on which such order is
based shall be and shall be deemed always to have been void and of no
effect. Accor ding to Clause (5), any appeal or cross appeal against any such
order as is referred to in Clause (4) pending immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, before
the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of
Clause (4). Clause (6) states that the provisions of Article 329-A shall take
effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution.
175. The proposition that the power of amendment under Article 368 does
not enable Parliament to alter the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution was laid down by this Court by a majority of 7 to 6 in the case
of His Holiness Kesavananda Bharathi v. State of Kerala
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . Apart from other reasons which
were given in some of the judgments of the learned Judges who constituted
the majority, the majority dealt with the connotation of the word
"amendment." It was held that the words "amendment of the Constitution"
in Article 368 could not have the effect of destroying or abrogating the basic
structure of the Constitution. Some of us who were parties to that case took
a different view and came to the conclusion that the words "amendment of
the Constitution" in Article 368 did not admit of any limitation. Those of us
who were in the minority in Kesavananda's case (supra) may still hold the
same view as was given expression to in that case. For the purpose of the
present case, we shall have to proceed in accordance with the law as laid
down by the majority in that case.
176. Before dealing with the question as to whether the impugned
amendment affects the basic structure of the Constitution, I may make it
clear that this Court is not concerned with the wisdom behind or the
propriety of the impugned Constitutional amendment. These are matters
essentially for those who are vested with the authority to make the
Constitutional amendment. All that this Court is concerned with is the
Constitutional validity of the impugned amendment.
177. I may first deal with the second contention advanced by Mr. Shanti
Bhushan. Accor ding to him, the impugned Constitutional amendment and
the amending Act of 1975 were passed in sessions of Parliament wherein
some members, including the respondent, could not be present because
they had been illegally detained. The fact that those measures were passed
by the requisite majority has not be questioned by the learned Counsel but
he submits that if the above mentioned members had not been detained
and had not been prevented from attending the sittings of Parliament, they
could have influenced the other members and as such it is possible that the
impugned Constitution Amendment Act and the 1975 RP amending Act
might not have been passed. Mr. Shanti Bhushan accordingly asserts that
the sittings of the Houses of Parliament in which the above mentioned two
measures were passed were not legal sittings. Any measure passed in such
sittings, according to the learned Counsel, cannot be considered to be a
valid piece of Constitutional amendment or statutory amendment.
178. There, is in my opinion, no force in the above submission. The
proposition that a member of Parliament cannot claim immunity from being
detained under a law relating to preventive detention does not now admit of
much doubt. The privileges, powers and the immunities of the members of
the two Houses of Indian Parliament as well as of the Indian legislatures as
the same as those of the members of the House of Commons as they
existed at the time of the commencement of the Constitution. The position
about the privileges of the members of the House Of Commons as it
obtained in the United Kingdom the relevant time has been stated in Erskine
lay's Parliamentary Practice, 18th Ed. (p. 100) as under:
The privilege of freedom from arrest is omitted to civil causes, and
has not been allowed to interfere with the administration of criminal
justice (sic) emergency legislation.
The above observations were relied upon by this Court in the case of K.
Anandan Nambiar v. Chief Secretary Government of Madras
MANU/SC/0060/1965 : 1966CriLJ586 . The petitioners in that case were
members of Parliament. They were retained by orders passed by the State
Government under Rule 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962. They
challenged the validity of the orders of detention, inter alia, on the ground
that Rule 30(1)(b) was invalid because a legislator cannot be detained so as
to prevent him from exercising his Constitutional rights as legislator while
the legislative chamber to which he belongs is in session. This Court
rejected that contention and held that the true Constitutional position is that
so far as a valid order of detention is concerned, a member of Parliament
can claim no special status higher than that of an ordinary citizen and that
he is as much liable to be arrested and detained under it as any other
citizen. It was also held that if an order of detention validly prevents a
member from attending a session of Parliament no occasion would arise for
the exercise by him of the right of freedom of speech.
179. Question as to whether a member of Parliament has been validly
detained under a law relating to preventive detention can, in my opinion, be
appropriately gone into in proceedings for a writ of habeas corpus. Such
question cannot be collaterally raised in proceedings like the present
wherein the court is concerned with the validity of a Constitution
Amendment Act and an Act to amend the Representation of the People Act.
In deciding a case before it the court should decide matters which arise
directly in the case. A court should resist the attempt of a party to induce it
to decide a matter which though canvassed during arguments is only
incidental and collateral and can appropriately be dealt with in separate
proceedings.
180. The contention advanced by Mr. Shanti Bhushan that the sittings of the
two Houses of Parliament in which the impugned Acts were passed were not
valid essentially relates to the validity of the proceedings of the two Houses
of Parliament. These are matters which are not justiciable and pertain to the
internal domain of the two Houses. Of course, the courts can go into the
question as to whether the measures passed by Parliament are
Constitutionally valid. The court cannot, however, go into the question as to
whether the sittings of the Houses of Parliament were not Constitutionally
valid because some members of those Houses were prevented from
attending and participating in the discussions in those Houses. It has not
been disputed before us, as already mentioned, that the impugned
Constitution Amendment Act and the statutory amendment Act were passed
by the requisite majority. It is not the case of the respondent that the
number of the detained members of Parliament was so large, that if they
had voted against the impugned measures, the measures would not have
been passed. Indeed, according to the affidavit filed during the course of
arguments, the number of members of the Lok Sabha who were detained
was 21 and of the Rajya Sabha the number was 10. An amendment of the
Constitution under Article 368, it is noteworthy, has apart from the
requirement in certain cases of ratification by the State legislatures, to be
passed in each House of Parliament by majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of two-thirds of the members of that House
present and voting. Accor ding to Clause (1) of Article 100 of the
Constitution, save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, save as
otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either
House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of
votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person
acting as Chairman or Speaker. The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting
as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a
casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. Clause (2) of that article
provides that either House of Parliament shall have power to act
notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any
proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered
subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted
or otherwise took part in the proceedings. Further, it is provided in Clause
(1) of Article 122 that the validity of any proceedings of Parliament shall not
be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
All this would show that the framers of the Constitution were anxious to
ensure that the procedural irregularities and other grounds like those
mentioned in Clause (2) of Article 100 should not vitiate the validity of
proceedings of Parliament and that it would not be permissible to call in
question those proceedings on such grounds. The observations on page 456
in the case of Special Reference No. 1 of (sic) that if the impugned
proceedings of a legislature are illegal and unconstitutional and not merely
irregular, the same can be scrutinized in a court of law do not, in my
opinion, warrant the inference that a court can hold the proceedings of a
legislature to be not valid and Constitutional by going into the question as to
whether the detention of any member who was prevented from being
present in the sitting of the legislature on account of his detention was or
was not in accordance with law. The acceptance of the above submission of
Mr. Shanti Bhushan would necessarily result in a situation that whenever a
law is made by Parliament, it would be open to a person affected by that law
to question the validity of that law by asking the court to examine the
validity of detention of each of the members of Parliament who were under
detention at the time the said law was passed even though those members
do not themselves assail the validity of their detention. It is plain that it
would not be possible for the court in such collateral proceedings to record a
finding about the validity of the detention of the members because the full
material having a bearing on the validity of the detention would normally be,
apart from the authority passing the order for detention, only with the
person ordered to be detained or his friends and relatives. It would plainly
be hazardous to record a finding without such material and a court of law, in
my opinion, should decline to record such a finding in collateral proceedings.
Till such time as a finding is recorded in appropriate proceedings about the
validity of the detention of the members of Parliament, the court would have
to proceed upon the assumption that the detention has not been shown to
be invalid.
181. Accor ding to Clause (3) of Article 105 of the Constitution, to which a
short reference has been made earlier, the powers, privileges and
immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and the
committees of each House, shall be such as may from time to time be
defined by Parliament by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the
House of Common s of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its
members and committees, at the commencement of this Constitution. No
law contemplated by Clause (3) has been made by the Parliament in India
and as such we have to find out the powers, privileges and immunities of
the House of Common s in the United Kingdom at the relevant time. In the
case of Bradlaugh v. Gossett (1884) 12 QBD 271 the plaintiff, having been
returned as member for the borough of Northampton, required the Speaker
of the House of Common s to call him to the table for the purpose of taking
oath. In consequence of something which had transpired on a former
occasion the Speaker declined to do so. The House of Commons then upon
motion resolved "that the Sergeant-at-Arms do exclude Mr. Bradlaugh (the
plaintiff) from the House until he shall engage not further to disturb the
proceedings of the House." In an action against the Sergeant-at-Arms
praying for an injunction to restrain him from carrying out the resolution,
the court held that this being a matter relating to the internal management
of the procedure of the House of Commons, the court had no power to
interfere. Dealing with the rights to be exercised within the walls of the
House, Stephen J. observed that those rights must be dependent upon the
resolution of the House. He also added that there was no appeal from the
decision of the House of Commons. Stephen J. in the course of the
judgment also observed:
...for the purpose of determining on a right to be exercised within
the House itself, and in particular the right of sitting and voting, the
House and the House alone could intepret the statute but...as
regarded rights to be exercised out of and independently of the
House, such as the right of suing for a penalty for having sat and
voted, the statute must be interpreted by this Court independently
of the House.
The above passage has been cited on page 83 in Erskine May's
Parliamentary Practice, 18th Ed. with a view to show that it is a right of each
House of Parliament to be the sole judge of the lawfulness of its own
proceedings. It would follow from the above that the courts cannot go into
the lawfulness of the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament.
182. The act of detaining a person is normally that of an outside agency and
not that of the House of Parliament. It would certainly look anomalous if the
act of an outside agency which might ultimately turn out to be not legal
could affect the validity of the proceedings of the House of Parliament or
could prevent that House from assembling and functioning.
183. The matter can also be looked at from another angle. Gazette copies of
the Election Laws Amendment Act, 1975 (Act 40 of 1975) and the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975 have been produced
before us. In the face of the publication in the Gazette of the above
mentioned two Acts this Court must assume that those two Acts were duly
passed. It may be pertinent in this context to refer to the position in the
United States where it was laid down in the case of Marshall Field & Co. v.
John M. Clark (1892) 143 US 649 as under:
The signing by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and by
the President of the Senate in open session, of an enrolled bill, is an
official attestation by the two houses that such bill has passed
Congress; and when the bill, thus attested receives the approval of
the President, and is deposited in the public archieves, its
authentication as a bill that has passed Congress is complete and
unimpeachable. An enrolled Act thus authenticated is sufficient
evidence of itself that it passed Congress.
In the case of a Constitutional amendment which requires ratification by the
States, the position was stated by Brandeis J. in the case of Oscar Leser v. J.
Mercer Garnett (1921) 66 L ed 505 as follows:
The proclamation by the Secretary certified that, from official
documents on file in the Department of State, it appeared that the
proposed Amendment was ratified by the legislatures of thirty-six
states, and that it 'has become valid to all intents and purposes as a
part of the Constitution of the United States'. As the legislatures of
Tennessee and of West Virginia had power to adopt the resolutions
of ratification, official notice to the Secretary, duly authenticated,
that they had done so, was conclusive upon him, and, being
certified to by his proclamation, is conclusive upon the courts.
184. I am, therefore, of the view that the Constitutional validity of the
Constitution Amendment Act and the 1975 Act amending the Representation
of the People Act cannot be assailed on the ground that some members of
Parliament were prevented because of their detention from attending and
participating in the proceedings of the respective Houses of Parliament.
185. We may now deal with Clause (4) of Article 329A which has been
added by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975. It is
necessary to clarify at the outset that we are concerned in the present case
only with the Constitutional validity of Clause (4) and not with that of the
other clauses of that article. I, therefore, express no opinion about the
validity of the other clauses of Article 329A. Clause (4) consists of four
parts:
(i) No law made by Parliament before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975 in so far as it
relates to the election petitions and matters connected therewith
shall apply or shall be deemed even to have applied to or in relation
to the election of any such person as is referred to in Clause (1) to
either House of Parliament;
(ii) and such election shall not be deemed to be void or ever to
have become void on any ground on which such election could be
declared to be void or has before such commencement been
declared to be void under any such law;
(iii) and notwithstanding any order made by any court before such
commencement declaring such election to be void, such election
shall continue to be valid in all respects;
(iv) and any such order and any finding on which such order is
based shall be and shall be deemed always to have been void and
of no effect.
186. In so far as part (i) is concerned, I find that it relates to a matter which
can be the subject of an ordinary legislation or a Constitutional amendment.
Accor ding to this part, no law made by Parliament before the
commencement of the Constitution (39th Amendment) Act, 1975 in so far
as it relates to the election petitions and matters connected therewith shall
apply and shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to the
election of any such person as is referred to in Clause (1) to either House of
Parliament. A law in the above terms can validly be made by a legislature as
well as by a constituent authority. The fact that the above law would have
retrospective effect would not detract from the competence of the
legislature or constituent authority to make such a law. It is well-settled that
it is permissible for a legislature to make a law with retrospective effect. The
power of a legislature to make a law with retrospective effect is not curtailed
or circumscribed by the fact that the subject matter of such retrospective
law is a matter relating to an election dispute (see State of Orissa v.
Bhupendra Kumar Bose MANU/SC/0220/1961 : AIR1962SC945 and Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana MANU/SC/0275/1969 : [1970]2SCR835 . Detailed reference to these cases would be made at the appropriate stage
subsequently. If a legislature can pass legislation in respect of matters
relating to an election dispute with a retrospective effect, the constituent
authority, which is a kind of super legislature, would a fortiori be entitled to
do so.
187. Part (ii) of Clause (4) spells out the consequence which flows from part
(i) of the clause. If the previous law in so far as it relates to the election
petitions and matters connected therewith was not to apply to the election
of the Prime Minister and the Speaker, it would necessarily follow that the
election of the appellant who was the Prime Minister would not be deemed
to be void or ever to have become void on the ground on which such
election could be declared to be void or has before such commencement
been declared to be void under any such law.
188. The same, to some extent, appears to be true of part (iv) of Clause
(4). If the previous law in so far as it relates to the election petitions and
matters connected therewith was not to apply to the election of the
appellant, the High Court shall be deemed to have had no jurisdiction to
decide the election petition challenging the election of the appellant. The
effect of part (i) of Clause (4) is that the High Court was divested of the
jurisdiction to decide the dispute relating to the election of the appellant
with a retrospective effect. The law under which the election of the appellant
was declared to be void as a result of the amendment was also made
inapplicable with retrospective effect to the dispute relating to the election
of the appellant. The resultant effect of the amendment thus was that the
order by which the election of the appellant was declared to be void and the
findings on which such order was based were rendered to be void and of no
effect.
189. Another aspect of part (iv) of Clause (4) relates to the question as to
whether it is open to the constituent authority to declare an order and a
finding of the High Court to be void and of no effect or whether such a
declaration can be made only either in separate judicial proceedings or in
proceedings before a higher court.
190. A declaration that an order made by a court of law is void is normally
part of the judicial function and is not a legislative function. Although there
is in the Constitution of India no rigid separation of powers, by and large the
spheres of judicial function and legislative function have been demarcated
and it is not permissible for the legislature to encroach upon the judicial
sphere. It has accordingly been held that a legislature while it is entitled to
change with retrospective effect the law which formed the basis of the
judicial decision, it is not permissible to the legislature to declare the
judgment of the court to be void or not binding
(see Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Broach Borough Municipality
MANU/SC/0057/1969 : [1971]79ITR136(SC) Janapada Sabha, Chhindwara
v. The Central Provinces Syndicate Ltd. MANU/SC/0398/1970 :
[1970]3SCR745 Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad etc. v. New Shorock Spg. & Wvg. Co. Ltd. etc. MANU/SC/0451/1970 : [1971]1SCR288 and State of Tamil Nadu v. M. Rayappa Gounder MANU/SC/0402/1970 : AIR1971SC231 ). 191. The position as it prevails in the United States, where guarantee of due
process of law is in operation, is given on pages 318-19 of Vol. 46 of the
American Jurisprudence 2d as under:
The general rule is that the legislature may not destroy, annul, set
aside, vacate, reverse, modify, or impair the final judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction, so as to take away private rights
which have become vested by the judgment. A statute attempting
to do so has been held unconstitutional as an attempt on the part of
the legislature to exercise judicial power, and as a violation of the
Constitutional guarantee of due process of law. The legislature is
not only prohibited from reopening cases previously decided by the
courts, but is also forbidden to affect the inherent attributes of a
judgment. That the statute is under the guise of an act affecting
remedies does not alter the rule. It is worthy of notice, however,
that there are cases in which judgments requiring acts to be done
in the future may validly be affected by subsequent legislation
making illegal that which the judgment found to be legal, or making
legal that which the judgment found to be illegal.
10.- Judgment as to public right.
With respect to legislative interference with a judgment, a
distinction has been made between public and private rights under
which distinction a statute may be valid even though it renders
ineffective a judgment concerning a public right. Even after a public
right has been established by the judgment of the court, it may be
annulled by subsequent legislation.
192. Question arises whether the above limitation imposed upon the
legislature about its competence to declare a judgment of the court to be
void would also operate upon the constituent authority?
193. View has been canvassed before us that the answer to the above
question should be in the negative. Although normally a declaration that the
judgment of a court is void can be made either in separate proceedings or in
proceedings before the higher court, there is, according to this view, no bar
to the constituent authority making a declaration in the Constitutional law
that such an order would be void especially when it relates to a matter of
public importance like the dispute relating to the election of a person
holding the office of Prime Minister. The declaration of the voidness of the
High Court judgment is something which can ultimately be traced to part (i).
Whether such a declaration should be made by the court or by the
constituent authority is more, it is urged, a matter of the mechanics of
making the declaration and would not ultimately affect the substance of the
matter that the judgment is declared void. According to Article 31B, without
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in Article 31A, none
of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the
provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void,
on the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or
takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this
Part, and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or
tribunal to the contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject
to the power to any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in
force. The effect of the above article, it is pointed out, is that even if a
statute has been declared to be void on the ground of contravention of
fundamental rights by a court of law, the moment that statute is specified
by the constituent authority in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, it
shall be deemed to have got rid of that voidness and the order of the court
declaring that statute to be void is rendered to be of no effect. It is not
necessary in such an event to make even the slightest change in the statute
to rid it of its voidness. The stigma of voidness attaching to the statute
because of contravention of fundamental rights found by the Court is
deemed to be washed away as soon as the statute is specified by the
constituent authority in the Ninth Schedule and the judgment of the Court in
this respect is rendered to be inoperative and of no effect. In the case of
Don John Douglas Liyange v. The Queen 1967 AC 259 the Judicial
Committee struck down as ultra vires and void the provisions of the Criminal
Law (Special Provisions) Act, 1962 on the ground that they involved the
usurpation and infringement by the legislature of the judicial powers
inconsistent with the written Constitution of Ceylon. Their Lordships,
however, expressly referred on page 287 to the fact that the impugned
legislation had not been passed by two-thirds majority in the manner
required for an amendment of the Constitution contained in Section 29(4) of
the Constitution. It was observed:
There was speculation during the argument as to what the position
would be if Parliament sought to procure such a result by first
amending the Constitution by a two-thirds majority. But such a
situation does not arise here. In so far as any Act passed without
recourse to Section 29(4) of the Constitution purports to usurp or
infringe the judicial power it is ultra vires.
The above observations, it is urged, show that the restriction upon the
legislature in encroaching upon judicial sphere may not necessarily hold
good in the case of constituent authority.
194. The above contention has been controverted by Mr. Shanti Bhushan
and he submits that the limitation on the power of the legislature that it
cannot declare void a judgment of the Court equally operates upon the
constituent authority. It is urged that the constituent authority can only
enact a law in general terms, even though it be a Constitutional law. The
constituent authority may also, if it so deems proper change the law which
is the basis of a decision and make such change with retrospective effect,
but it cannot, according to the learned Counsel, declare void the judgment
of the Court. Declaration of voidness of a judgment, it is stated, is a judicial
act and cannot be taken over by the constituent authority. Although
legislatures or the constituent authority can make laws including those for
creation of courts, they cannot, according to the submission, exercise
judicial functions by assuming the powers of a super court in the same way
as the Courts cannot act as a super legislature. It is in my opinion, not
necessary to dilate upon this aspect and express a final opinion upon the
rival contentions, because of the view I am taking of part (iii) of Clause (4).
195. We may now come to part (iii) of Clause (4). By part (iii) it is declared
that the election of the appellant shall continue to be valid in all respects.
Such a declaration would not follow from part (i) of the clause. It would not
also follow from part (ii) and part (iv) of the clause which, as mentioned
earlier, in effect represented the consequences flowing from part (i). The
election to the Lok Sabha of the appellant, who was the Prime Minister, was
challenged on the ground that she or her election agents had been guilty of
some malpractices. The declaration that her election was to be valid in all
respects necessarily involved the process of going into the grounds on which
her election had been assailed and holding those grounds to be either
factually incorrect or to be of such a nature as in law did not warrant the
declaration of her election to be void. The case of the appellant is that some
of the grounds mentioned against her were factually incorrect and in respect
of those grounds the findings of the High Court is against the respondent
and in her favour. In respect of some other grounds, except in one or two
matters there is not much divergence between the appellant and the
respondent on the question of facts. The point of controversy between the
parties mainly is that, according to the respondent, those facts constituted
corrupt practice as defined in Section 123 of the RP Act, while according to
the appellant those facts did not constitute corrupt practice. In any case,
according to the appellant, in view of the amendment made in the RP Act by
amending Acts 58 of 1974 and 40 of 1975, these facts did not constitute
corrupt practice. The declaration made in part (iii) of Clause (4) that the
election of the appellant was to be valid in all respects was tantamount in
the very nature of things to the repelling of the grounds advanced by the
respondent to challenge the election of the appellant. Question therefore
arises as to what, if any, was the law which was applied in repelling the
grounds advanced by the respondent to challenge the election of the
appellant. So far as the existing law relating to election disputes was
concerned, part (i) of Clause (4) expressly stated that such a law would not
apply to the petition filed by the respondent to challenge the election of the
appellant. This means that the provisions of the Representation of the
People Act were not to apply to the petition filed by the respondent against
the appellant. This also means that the amending Acts 58 of 1974 and 40 of
1975 were not to apply to the dispute relating to election of the appellant.
196. The dispute relating to the election of the appellant is also not to be
governed by law which is to be enacted under Clause (1) of Article 329A.
Such a law would apply only to future elections. The result is that so far as
the dispute relating to the election of the appellant is concerned, a legal
vacuum came into existence. It was open to the constituent authority to fill
that vacuum by prescribing a law which was to govern the dispute arising
out of the petition filed by the respondent to challenge the election of the
appellant. The constituent authority, however, did not to do so and
straightway proceeded to declare the election of the appellant to be valid.
There is nothing in Clause (4) to indicate that the constituent authority
applied any law in declaring the election of the appellant to be valid and if
so, what was that law.
197. I am unable to accede to the argument that the constituent authority
kept in view the provisions of the RP Act as amended by Acts 58 of 1974
and 40 of 1975 and their impact on the challenge to the election of the
appellant in declaring the election of the appellant to be valid. The difficulty
in accepting this argument is that in part (i) of Clause (4) the constituent
authority expressly stated that the previous law, namely, the RP Act as
amended in so far as it related to election petitions and matters connected
therewith was not to apply so far as the challenge to the election of the
appellant was concerned. It is also difficult to agree that the constituent
authority took into account some other unspecified law or norm in declaring
the election of the appellant to be valid. As mentioned earlier, there is
nothing in Clause (4) to indicate that the constituent authority took into
account some other law or norm and if so, what that law or norm was. The
position which thus emerges is that according to Clause (4) no law was to
apply for adjudicating upon the challenge to the election of the appellant
and the same was in terms of part (iii) to be valid in all respects. The
question with which we are concerned is whether the provisions of Clause
(4) of the Article 329A by which the constituent authority in effect
prescribed that no election law was to govern the challenge to the election
of the appellant and that the same in any case was to be valid in all respects
is a permissible piece of Constitutional amendment or whether it is void on
the ground that it affects the basic structure of the Constitution.
198. This Court in the case of Kesavananda Bharati MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 held by majority that the power of amendment of the
Constitution contained in Article 368 does not permit altering the basic
structure of the Constitution. All the seven Judges who constituted the
majority were also agreed that democratic set up was part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Democracy postulates that there should be
periodical elections, so that people may be in a position either to re-elect
the old representatives or, if they so choose, to change the representatives
and elect in their place other representatives. Democracy further
contemplates that the elections should be free and fair, so that the voters
may be in a position to vote for candidates of their choice. Democracy can
indeed function only upon the faith that elections are free and fair and not
rigged and manipulated, that they are effective instruments of ascertaining
popular will both in reality and form and are not mere rituals calculated to
generate illusion of deference to mass opinion. Free and fail elections
require that the candidates and their agents should not resort to unfair
means or malpractices as may impinge upon the process of free and fair
elections. Even in the absence of unfair means and malpractices, sometimes
the result of an election is materially affected because of the improper
rejection of ballot papers. likewise, the result of an election may be
materially affected on account of the improper rejection of a nomination
paper. Disputes, therefore, arise with regard to the validity of elections. For
the resolving of those disputes, the different democratic countries of the
world have made provisions prescribing the law and the forum for the
resolving of those disputes. To give a few examples, we may refer to the
United Kingdom where a parliamentary election petition is tried by two
judges on the rota for the trial of parliamentary election petitions in
accordance with the Representation of the People Act, 1949. Section 5 of
Article 1 of the U S Constitution provides that each House (Senate and the
House of Representatives) shall be judge of the elections, returns and
qualifications of its own members. Section 47 of the Australian Constitution
provides that until the Parliament otherwise provides, any question
respecting the qualification of a senator or of a member of the House of
Representatives, or respecting a vacancy in either House of Parliament, and
any question of a disputed election to either House, shall be determined by
the House in which the question arises. Article 55 of the Japanese
Constitution states that each House shall judge disputes related to
qualifications of its members. However, in order to deny a seat to any
member, it is necessary to pass a resolution by a majority of two-thirds or
more of the members present. Article 46 of the Iceland Constitution
provides that the All thing itself decides whether its members are legally
elected and whether a member is disqualified. Article 64 of the Norwegian
Constitution states that the representatives elected shall be furnished with
certificates, the validity of which shall be submitted to the judgment of the
Storthing. Article 59 of the French Constitution provides that the
Constitutional Council shall rule, in the case of disagreement, on the
regularity of the election of deputies and senatOrs. Article 41 of the German
Federal Republic Constitution states that the scrutiny of elections shall be
the responsibility of the Bundestag. It shall also decide whether a deputy
has lost his seat in the Bundestag. Against the decision of the Bundestag an
appeal shall lie to the Federal Constitutional Court. Details shall be regulated
by a federal law. Accor ding to Article 66 of the Italian Constitution, each
Chamber decides as to the validity of the admission of its own Members and
as to cases subsequently arising concerning ineligibility and incompatibility.
In Turkey Article 75 provides inter alia that it shall be the function of
Supreme Election Board to review and pass final judgment on all
irregularities, complaints and objections regarding election matters during
and after elections. The function and powers of the Supreme Election Board
shall be regulated by law. Article 53 of the Malaysian Constitution provides
that if any question arises whether a member of a House of Parliament has
become disqualified for membership, the decision of that House shall be
taken and shall be final.
199. Not much argument is needed to show that unless there be a
machinery for resolving an election dispute and for going into the allegations
that elections were not free and fair being vitiated by malpractices the
provision that a candidate should not resort to malpractices would be in the
nature of a mere pious wish without any legal sanction. It is further plain
that if the validity of the election of a candidate is challenged on some
grounds, the said election can be declared to be valid only if we provide a
forum for going into those grounds and prescribe a law for adjudicating
upon those grounds. If the said forum finds that the grounds advanced to
challenge the election are not well-founded or are not sufficient to invalidate
the election in accordance with the prescribed law or dismisses the petition
to challenge the election on some other ground, in such an event it can be
said that the election of the returned candidate is valid.
200. Besides other things, election laws lay down a code of conduct in
election matters and prescribe, what may be called, rules of electoral
morality. Election laws also contain a provision for resolving disputes and
determination of controversies which must inevitably arise in election
matters as they arise in other spheres of human activity. The object of such
a provision is to enforce rules of electoral morality and to punish deviance
from the prescribed code of conduct in election matters. It is manifest that
but for such a provision, there would be no sanction for the above code of
conduct and rules of electoral morality. It is also plain that nothing would
bring the code of conduct into greater contempt and make a greater
mockery of it than the absence of a provision to punish its violation. The
position would become all the more glaring that even though a provision
exists on the statute book for punishing violation of the code of conduct in
election matters, a particular election is made immune and granted
exemption from the operation of such a provision.
201. The vice of Clause (4) of Article 329A is not merely that it makes the
previous law contained in the RP Act as amended by Act 58 of 1974 and 40
of 1975 inapplicable to the challenge to the election of the appellant it also
makes no other election law applicable for resolving that dispute. The
further vice from which the aid clause suffers is that it not merely livests the
previous authority, namely, the High Court of its jurisdiction to decide the
dispute relating to the election of the appellant, it confers no jurisdiction on
some other authority to decide that dispute. Without even prescribing a law
and providing a forum for adjudicating upon the grounds advanced by the
respondent to challenge the election of the appellant, the constituent
authority has declared the election of the appellant to be valid.
202. To confer an absolute validity upon the election of one particular
candidate and to prescribe that the validity of that election shall not be
questioned before any forum or under any law would necessarily have the
effect of saying that howsoever gross may be the improprieties which might
have vitiated that election, howsoever flagrant may be the malpractices
which might have been committed on behalf of the returned candidate
during the course of the election and howsoever foul and violative of the
principles of free and fair elections may be the means which might have
been employed for securing success in that election, the said election would
be none-the-less valid and it would not be permissible to complain of those
improprieties malpractices and unfair means before any forum or under any
law with a view to assail the validity of that election. Not much argument is
needed to show that any provision which brings about that result is
subversive of the principle of free and fair election in a democracy. The fact
that the candidate concerned is the Prime Minister of the country or the
Speaker of the lower House of Parliament would, if anything, add force to
the above conclusion because both these offices represent the acme of the
democratic process in a country. That in fact the elections of the incumbents
of the two offices were not vitiated by any impropriety, malpractice or unfair
means is not relevant or germane to the question with which we are
concerned, namely, as to what is the effect of Clause (4) of Article 329A.
203. The vice of declaration contained in part (iii) of Clause (4) regarding
the validity of the election of the appellant is aggravated by the fact that
such a declaration is made after the High Court which was then seized of
jurisdiction had found substance in some of the grounds advanced by the
respondent and had consequently declared the election of the appellant to
be void. To put a stamp of validity on the election of a candidate by saying
that the challenge to such an election would not be governed by any
election law and that the said election in any case would be valid and
immune from any challenge runs counter to accepted norms of free and fair
elections in all democratic countries. In the case of Marbury v. Madison
(1803) 1 Cranch 137 Marshall C.J. said that "the government of the United
States has been emphatically termed a government of laws and not of
men". In United States v. Lee (1883) 106 US 196 Samuel Miller J. observed
that "no man is so high that he is above the law....All officers are creatures
of the law and are bound to obey it". Although the above observations were
made in the context of the US Constitution, they, in my opinion, hold equally
good in the context of our Constitution.
204. It has been argued on behalf of the appellant that the grounds on
account of which the election of the appellant had been held to be void by
the High Court were of a technical nature. I need not express any opinion
about this aspect of the matter at this stage but, assuming it to be so, I find
that Clause (4) of Article 329A is so worded that however serious may be
the malpractices vitiating the election of the Speaker or the Prime Minister,
the effect of Clause (4) is that the said election would have to be treated as
valid. I cannot accede to the submission that in construing Clause (4) we
should take into account the facts of the appellant's case. This is contrary to
all accepted norms of construction. If a Clause of a Constitution or statutory
provision is widely worded, the width of its ambit cannot be circumscribed
by taking into account the facts of an individual case to which it applies. As
already mentioned, Clause (4) deals with the past election not merely of the
Prime Minister but also of the Speaker. So far as the election of the Speaker
is concerned, we do not know as to whether the same was ever challenged
and, if so, on what grounds, and whether such a dispute is still pending.
205. Another argument advanced in support of the validity of the
amendment is that we should take it that the constituent authority
constituted itself to be the forum for deciding the dispute relation to the
validity of the election of the appellant, and after considering the facts of the
case, declared the election of the appellant to be valid. There is, however,
nothing before us as to indicate that the constituent authority went into the
material which had been adduced before the High Court relating to the
validity of the election of the appellant and after considering that material
held the election of the appellant to be valid. Indeed, the statement of
Objects and Reasons appended to the Constitution (Thirty-ninth
Amendment) Bill makes no mention of this thing. In any case, the vice of
Clause (4) would still lie in the fact that the election of the appellant was
declared to be valid on the basis that it was not to be governed by any law
for settlement of election disputes. Although the provisions of a
Constitutional amendment should be construed in a fair and liberal spirit,
such liberal spirit should not be carried by the court to the extent of
discovering the application of a dormant and latent law in the declaration of
the validity of an election even though there is not even a remote indication
of such a law in the impugned provision. Rule of law postulates that the
decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules
and in general such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should
know where he is. If a decision is taken without any principle or without any
rule, it is not predictable and such decision is the antithesis of a decision
taken in accordance with the rule of law.
206. The matter can also be looked at from another angle. The effect of
impugned Clause (4) is to take away both the right and the remedy to
challenge the election of the appellant. Such extinguishment of the right and
remedy to challenge the validity of the election, in my opinion, is
incompatible with the process of free and fair elections. Free and fair
elections necessarily postulate that if the success of a candidate is secured
in elections by means which violate the principle of free and fair elections,
the election should on that account be liable to be set aside and be declared
to be void. To extinguish the right and the remedy to challenge the validity
of an election would necessarily be tantamount to laying down that even) if
the election of a candidate is vidated by the fact that it was secured by
flagrant violation of the principles of free and fair election, the same would
still enjoy immunity from challenge and would be nonetheless valid. Clause
(4) of Article 329A can, therefore, be held to strike at the basis of free and
fair 'elections,
207. 1 agree that it is not necessary in a democratic set up that disputes
relating to the validity of the elections must be settled by courts of law,
There are many countries like France, Japan, and the United States of
America where consistently with the democratic set up the determination of
such controversies is by legislatures or by authorities other than the courts.
The question with which we are concerned, however, is whether it is
permissible in a democratic set up that a dispute with regard to the validity
of a particular election shall not be raised before any forum and shall not be
governed by law and whether such an election can be declared, despite the
existence of a dispute relating to its validity, to be valid by making the
existing law relating to election disputes not applicable to it and also by not
applying .any other election law to such a dispute. The answer to such a
question, for the reasons given earlier by me, should be in the negative.
208. Reference to the election of the US President made by Mr. Sen is also
not helpful to him. It is clear from observations on pages 47-50 of the
American Common wealth by Bryce 1912 Ed. and Sections 5, 6 and 15 of the
United States Code (1970 Ed.) that there is ample provision for the
determination of such disputes after the poll. The fact that such
determination of the dispute is before the declaration of the result would not
detract from the proposition that it is essential for free and fair elections
that there should be a forum and law for the settlement of such disputes
relating to the validity of the election,
209. Argument has also been advanced that the offices of the Prime 1975
S.C/148 XII G-10-n Minister and Speaker are of great importance and as
such they constitute a class by themselves. This argument, in my opinion,
would have relevance if instead of the law governing disputes relating to the
election of other persons, another law had been prescribed to govern the
dispute relating to the election of a person who holds the office of the Prime
Minister or Speaker. As it is, what we find is that so far as the dispute
relating to the election of the appellant is concerned, neither the previous
law governing the election of persons holding the office of the Prime Minister
is to apply to it nor the future law to be framed under Clause (1) of Article
329A governing the election of persons holding the office of Prime Minister is
to apply to this dispute. Likewise, the previous forum for adjudicating upon
the election dispute which went into the matter, has been divested of its
jurisdiction with retrospective effect and, at the same time, no jurisdiction
has been vested in any other forum to go into the matter. The present is not
a case of change of forum. It is, on the contrary, one of the abolition of
forum. As such, the question as to whether the office of Prime Minister
constitutes a class by itself loses much of its significance in the context of
the controversy with which we are concerned,
210. It has been argued in support of the Constitutional validity of Clause
(4) that as a result of this amendment, the validity of one election has been
preserved. Since the basic structure of the Constitution, according to the
submission, continues to be the same, Clause (4) cannot be said to be an
impermissible piece of Constitutional amendment. The argument has a
seeming plausibility about it, but a deeper reflection would show that it is
vitiated by a basic fallacy. Law normally connotes a rule or norm which is of
general application. It may apply to all the persons or class of persons or
even individuals of a particular description. Law prescribes the abstract
principles by the application of which individual cases are decided. Law,
however, is not what Blackstone called "a sentence". According to Roscoe
Pound, law, as distinguished from laws, is the system of authoritative
materials for grounding or guiding judicial and administrative action
recognized or established in a politically organized society (see page 106.
Jurisprudence, Vol. III). Law is not the same as judgment Law lays down the
norm in abstract terms with 'a coercive power and sanction against those
guilty of violating the norm, while judgment represents the decision arrived
at by the application of law to the concrete facts of a case. Constitutional
law relates to the various organs of a State; it deals with the structure of
the government, the extent of distribution of its powers and the modes and
principles of its operation. The Constitution of India is so detailed that some
of the matters which in a brief Constitution like that of the United States of
America are dealt with by statutes form the subject-matter of various
Articles of our Constitution. There is, however, in a Constitutional law, as
there is in the very idea of law, some element of generality or general
application. It also carries with it a concept of its applicability in future to
situations which may arise in that context. If there is amendment of some
provision of the Constitution and the amendment deals with matters which
constitute Constitutional law in the normally accepted sense, the court while
deciding the question of the validity of the amendment would have to find
out, in view of the majority opinion in Keshavananda Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , as to whether the amendment
affects the basic structure of the Constitution. The Constitutional
amendment contained in Clause (4) with which we are concerned in the
present case is, however, of an altogether different nature. Its avowed
object is to confer validity on the election of the appellant to the Lok Sabha
in 1971 after that election had been declared to be void by the High Court
and an appeal against the judgment of the High Court was pending in. this
Court. In spite of our query, we were not referred to any precedent of a
similar amendment of any Constitution of the world. The uniqueness of the
impugned Constitutional amendment would not, however, affect its validity.
If the constituent authority in its wisdom has chosen the validity of a
disputed election as the subject-matter of a Constitutional amendment, this
Court cannot go behind that wisdom. All that this Court is concerned with is
the validity of the amendment. I need not go into the question as to
whether such a matter, in view of the normal concept of Constitutional law,
can strictly be the subject of a Constitutional amendment. I shall for the
purpose of this case assume that such a matter can validly be the subject-
matter of a Constitutional amendment. The question to be decided is that if
the impugned amendment of the Constitution violates a principle which is
part of the basic structure of the Constitution, can it enjoy immunity from
an attack on its validity because of the fact that for the future, the basic
structure of the Constitution remains unaffected. The answer to the above
question, in my opinion, should be in the negative. What has to be seen in
such a matter is whether the amendment contravenes or runs counter to an
imperative rule or postulate which is an integral part of the basic structure
of the Constitution. If so, it would be an impermissible amendment and it
would make no difference whether it relates to one case or a large number
of cases. If an amendment striking at the basic structure of the Constitution
is not permissible, it would not acquire validity by being related only to one
case. To accede to the argument advanced in support of the validity of the
amendment would be tantamount to holding that even though it is not
permissible to change the basic structure of the Constitution, whenever the
authority concerned deems it proper to make such an amendment, it can do
so and circumvent the bar to the making of such an amendment by
confining it to one case. What is prohibited cannot become permissible
because of its being confined to one matter.
211. Lastly, question arises whether we should strike down Clause (4) in its
entirety or in part. So far as this aspect is concerned, I am of the view that
the different parts of Clause (4) are so integrally connected and linked with
each other that it is not possible to sever them and uphold the validity of
part of it after striking down the rest of it. It would indeed be unfair to the
appellant if we were to uphold the first part of Clause (4) and strike down
other parts 'or even part (iii). As would be apparent from what follows
hereafter, the election of the appellant is being upheld by applying the
provisions of the RP Act as amended by Act 40 of 1975. Such a course
would not be permissible if we were to uphold the validity of the first part of'
Clause (4) and strike down the other parts. We would also in that event be
creating a vacuum which is the very vice for which we are striking down
Clause (4). I am, therefore, of the view that Clause (4) should be struck
down in its entirety,
212. In view of my finding that Clause (4) strikes at the basic structure of
the Constitution, it is not necessary to go into the question as to whether,
assuming that the constituent- authority took it upon itself to decide the
dispute relating to the validity of the election of the appellant, it was
necessary for the constituent authority to hear the parties concerned before
it declared the election of the appellant to be valid and thus in effect
repelled the challenge of the respondent to the validity of the appellant's
election,
213. As a result of the above. I strike down Clause (4) of Article 329A on
the ground that it violates the principle of free and fair elections which is an
essential postulate of democracy and which in its turn is a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution inasmuch as (1) it abolishes the forum without
providing for another forum for going into the dispute
relating to the validity of the election of the appellant and further prescribes
that the said dispute shall not be governed by any election law and that the
validity of the said election shall be absolute and not consequently be liable
to be assailed, and (2) it extinguishes both the right and the remedy to
challenge the validity of the aforesaid election.
214. We may now deal with Appeal Mo. 887 of 1975 filed by the appellant.
So far as this appeal is concerned, it has been argued by Mr. Sen on behalf
of the appellant that the grounds on which the election of the appellant has
been declared by the High Court to be void no longer hold good in view of
the amendment in the RP Act by Act 40 of 1975. As against that, Mr. Shanti
Bhushan on behalf of the respondent has assailed the validity of Act 40 of
1975. In the alternative, Mr. Shanti Bhushan contends that even if the
validity of Act 40 of 1975 were to be upheld, the grounds on which the
election of the appellant has been declared to be void would still hold good.
215. The question as to whether Act 40 of 1975 is not vitated by any
Constitutional infirmity would be dealt with by me subsequently. For the
time being I would proceed upon the basis that the statutory amendment in
the RP Act by Act 40 of 1975 is Constitutionally valid.
216. Section 10 of Act 40 of 1975, which has been reproduced earlier,
makes it clear, inter alia, that the provisions of Sections 6, 7 and 8 of that
Act shall have retrospective operation, so as to apply to or in relation to any
election held before the commencement of this Act, to either House of
Parliament in respect of which appeal from any order of any High Court
made in any election petition under the RP Act is pending before the
Supreme Court immediately before such commencement. It is, therefore,
obvious that the provisions of Sections 6, 7 and 8 of Act 40 of 1975 would
be attracted to this case. One of the questions which actually arose for
determination before the High Court was as to what was the date on which
the appellant held herself out as a candidate. According to the written
statement filed on behalf of the appellant, she held herself out as a
candidate from the Rae Bareli constituency on February 1, 1971 when she
filed her nomination paper. As against that, the case of the respondent was
that the appellant held herself out as a candidate from that constituency on
December 27, 1970 when the Lok Sabha was dissolved. The finding of the
High Court is that the appellant held herself out as a candidate from the Rae
Bareli constituency on December 29, 1970 when she addressed a Press
conference. The question as to when the appellant held herself out as a
candidate from the Rae Bareli constituency has now become purely
academic in view of the change in the definition of the word "candidate" as
given in Clause (b) of Section 79 of the RP Act by Act 40 of 1975. According
to the original definition, "unless the context otherwise requires, 'candidate'
means a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a
candidate at any election and any such person shall be deemed to have
been a candidate as from the time when, with the election in prospect, he
began to hold himself out as a prospective candidate". The new definition
states that "unless the context otherwise requires, 'candidate' means a
person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate
at any election". The question as to when a person holds himself out as
candidate, therefore, loses its importance in the context of the new
definition.
217. One of the grounds which weighed with the High Court in declaring the
election of the appellant to be void was that the appellant committed corrupt
practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act inasmuch as she obtained and
procured the assistance, for the furtherance of her election prospects, of
Yashpal Kapur during the period from January 7 to 24, 1971 when Yashpal
Kapur was still a gazetted officer in the service of the Government of India.
218. Accor ding to Clause (7) of Section 123 of the RP Act, the following act
shall constitute corrupt practice under that clause:
The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or
procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other person with the
consent of a candidate or his election agent, any assistance (other
than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate's election, from any person in the service of the
Government and belonging to any of the following classes, namely:
(a) gazetted officers;
(b) stipendiary Judges and Magistrates;
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;
(d) members of the police forces;
(e) excise officers;
(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers
known as lambardars, malguzars, deshmukhs or by any
other name, whose duty is to collect land revenue and who
are remunerated by a share of, or commission, on, the
amount of land revenue collected by them but who do not
discharge any police function; and
(g) such other class of persons in the service of the
Government as may be prescribed.
Explanation.- (1) In this section the expression 'agent'
includes an election agent, or polling agent and any person
who is held to have acted as an agent in connection with
the consent of the candidate.
(2) For the purposes of Clause (7), a person shall be deemed to
assist in the furtherance of the prospects of a candidate's election if
he acts as an election agent
Perusal of the above clause shows that what constitute; corrupt practice
under the above clause is the obtaining or procuring or abetting or
attempting to obtain or procure by & candidate or his agent or by any
person the consent of a candidate or the ejection agent any assistance
(other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the
candidate's election from any person in the service of the Government and
belonging to any of the classes specified therein, It is, in my opinion,
essential that at the time the impugned act, namely, the obtaining or
procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure the assistance of a
Government servant is done, the person doing the act must be a candidate
or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his
election agent. Candidate in this clause would mean a person who has been
or who claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at the election. I
am unable to accede to the submission of Mr. Shanti Bhushan that the word
"candidate" has been used merely to identify the person who is duly
nominated as a candidate at an election and that the word "candidate", as
mentioned in Clause (7), would also include a person who, after the
commission of the corrupt practice specified in that Clause, is subsequently
nominated as a candidate. The amended definition reproduced above shows
that unless context otherwise requires, candidate means a person who has
been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election.
To accede to the submission of Mr. Shanti Bhushan would be tantamount to
reading in the definition of the word "candidate" in addition to the words
"who has been or claims to have been duly nominated" also the words "who
is subsequently nominated as a candidate". There is nothing to indicate that
the word "candidate" in Clause (7) of Section 123 has been used merely to
identify the person who has been or would be subsequently nominated as a
candidate. A definition clause in a statute is a legislative device with a view
to avoid making different provisions of the statute to be cumbersome.
Where a word is defined in the statute and that word is used in a provision
to which that definition is applicable, the effect is that wherever the word
defined is used in that provision, the definition of the word gets substituted.
Reading the word "candidate" in Section 123(7) of the RP Act in the sense in
which it has been defined as a result of the amendment made by Act 40 of
1975. I find that the only reasonable inference is that the person referred to
as a candidate in that clause should be a person who has been or claims to
have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election and not one who is
yet to be nominated.
219. Mr. Shanti Bhushan has invited our attention to Clause (b) of Section
100(1) of the RP Act wherein it is stated that subject to the provisions of
Sub-section (2) of the section if the High Court is of the opinion that any
corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election
agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his
election agent, the High Court shall declare the election of the returned
candidate to be void. "Returned candidate" has been defined in Clause (f) of
Section 79 to mean, unless the context otherwise requires, a candidate
whose name has been published under Section 67 as duly elected. It is
urged that as the corrupt practice referred to in Clause (b) of Section 100(1)
of the RP Act would in the very nature of things have to be committed by
the returned candidate before his name was published under Section 67 as
duly elected, the words "returned candidate" in Clause (b) of Section 100(1)
must be taken to have been used with a view to identify the person who
subsequently became a returned candidate. It is urged that if while dealing
with corrupt practice committed by a candidate before he became a
returned candidate in the context of Section 100(1)(b), it is permissible to
hold that the words "returned candidate" are intended to identify the person
who subsequently became a returned candidate, the same criterion should
apply when construing the word "candidate" in Section 123 of the RP Act.
This contention, in my opinion, is devoid of force. The definition of the words
"returned candidate" and "candidate" given in Section 79 of the RP Act are
preceded by the words "unless the context otherwise requires". The
connotation of the above words is that normally it is the definition given in
the section which should be applied and given effect to. This normal rule
may, however, be departed from if there be something in the context to
show that the definition should not be applied. So far as Clause (b) of
Section 100(1) is concerned, the context plainly requires that the corrupt
practice referred to in that clause should have been committed by the
candidate before he became a returned candidate, or by his agent or by any
other person with his consent or that of his election agent. The compulsion
arising from the context which is there in Clause (b) of Section 100(1) of the
RP Act is singularly absent in Section 123(7) of the RP Act. There is nothing
in the context of the latter provision which requires that we should not give
full effect to the new definition of the word "candidate".
220. Reference has also been made by Mr. Shanti Bhushan to observations
on pases 222-3 of Vol. 14 of Halsbury's Laws of England, Third Edition,
according to which a candidate at a general election may be guilty of
treating even though the treating took place before the dissolution of the
Parliament and consequently before he came within the statutory definition
of a candidate. These observations have been made in the context of the
statutory provisions in the United Kingdom. Those provisions were couched
in a language substantially different from that in which the provisions of the
RP Act in India are couched and as such, in my opinion, not much assistance
can be derived from those observations.
221. As the appellant filed her nomination paper on February 1, 1971, in
view of the amended definition of the word "candidate", it would have to be
taken that the appellant became a candidate only on February 1, 1971. The
result is that even if the finding of the High Court that the appellant
obtained and procured the assistance of Yashpal Kapur during the period
from January 7 to 24, 1971 were assumed to be correct, the appellant shall
not be deemed to have committed corrupt practice under Section 123(7) of
the RP Act. As regards the assistance of Yashpal Kapur which the appellant
is alleged to have obtained and procured after January 14, 1971, the
controversy stands resolved also by another amendment. According to the
case of the appellant, Yashpal Kapur tendered his resignation by letter dated
January 13, 1971 with effect from January 14, 1971. The High Court found
that Yashpal Kapur continued to be in the service of the Government of
India till January 25, 1971 which was the date of the notification regarding
the acceptance of Yashpal Kapur's resignation. According to the said
notification, the President was pleased "to accept the resignation of Shri
Y.P.R. Kapoor, Officer on Special Duty in the Prime Minister's Secretariat,
with effect from the fore noon of the 14th January, 1971". The explanation
which has been added to Section 123 or of the RP Act makes it clear, inter
alia that for the purpose of Clause (7), notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law, the publication in the official gazette of the resignation and
termination of service of a person in the services of the Central Government
shall be conclusive proof of his resignation and termination of service and
where the date of taking effect of his resignation or termination of service is
stated in such person ceased to be in such that such person ceased to be in
such service with effect from the said date. Yashpal Kapur in view of the
newly added explanation, shall be taken to have ceased to be in
Government service with effect from January 14, 1971. Any assistance of
Yashpal Kapur which the appellant was alleged to have obtained or procured
on or after January 14, 1971 would not, therefore, make her guilty of
corrupt practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act.
222. Another ground on which the High Court declared the election of the
appellant to be void was that she committed corrupt practice under Section
123(7) of the RP Act inasmuch as she obtained the assistance of the officers
of the UP Government, particularly the District Magistrate, Superintendent
of Police, the Executive Engineer. PWD and the Engineer Hydel Department
for construction of rostrums and arrangement of supply of power for
loudspeakers in the meetings addressed by her on February 1, 1971 and
February 25, 1971 in furtherance of her election prospects. It is not disputed
that what was done by the above mentioned officers was in pursuance of
official directions and in the discharge or purported discharge of the official
duties This is indeed clear from letter dated November 19, 1969 from the
Govt. of India, Ministry of Home Affairs to all State Governments wherein
there is reference to Rule (6) of the Rules and Instructions for the Protection
of the Prime Minister and it is stated:
As the security of the Prime Minister is the concern of the State all
arrangements for putting up the rostrum, the barricades etc. at the
meeting place, including that of an election meeting will have to be
made by the State Government concerned....
In the case of election meetings, all expenditure on police, setting
up of barricades and taking lighting arrangements will be borne by
the State Government while expenditure on the public address
system and any decorative arrangements will be the responsibility
of the political party concerned. (The expenditure on all these
items, may in the first instance be borne by the State Government
and then recovered from the political parties concerned). In regard
to the rostrum only 25 per cent of the cost of the rostrum or Rs.
2500.00 whichever is less, shall be contributed by the party as the
rostrum has to be of certain specifications because of security
considerations.
Assuming that the finding of fact recorded by the High Court in this respect
is correct, the appellant can still be not guilty of the commission of corrupt
practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act in view of the new proviso which
has been inserted at the end of Clause (7) of Section 123 and which reads
as under:
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the discharge or
purported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or
provides any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to or in
relation to any candidate or his agent or any other person acting
with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, (whether by
reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason),
such arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to
be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate's election." The above proviso has also a direct bearing
on the allegation of the respondent that the appellant committed
corrupt practice under Section 123(7) of the RP Act inasmuch as
she or her election agent procured the assistance of members of
armed forces of the Union for furtherance of her election prospects
because of the fact that the members of the armed forces arranged
planes and helicopters of the Air Force for her flights to enable her
to address meetings in her constituency.
223. It has been argued by Mr. Shanti Bhushan that the words "in the
discharge or purported discharge of his official duty" in the above mentioned
proviso have reference only to statutory duty and not to other duty
performance of which takes place in pursuance of administrative
instructions. I find it difficult to accede to the above submission as there is
nothing in the above proviso to confine the words "official, duty" to duty
imposed by statute. Official duty would include not merely duties imposed
by statutes but also, those which have to be carried out in pursuance of
administrative instructions.
224. Mr. Shanti Bhushan during the course of arguments made it plain that
apart from his submission with regard to the validity of Act 40 of 1975, his
objection relating to the applicability of Act 40 of 1975 was confined to two
matters, namely, the connotation of the word "candidate" and the meaning
to be attached to official duty. Both these objections have been found by me
to be not tenable. I would, therefore, hold that subject to the question as to
whetherin the provisions of Act 40 of 1975 are) valid, the grounds on which
the High; Court has declared the election of the appellant to be void no
longer hold, good for declaring the said election to be void.
225. We may also before dealing with the validity of Act 40 of l975 refer to
one other change brought about by that Act which has a bearing upon the
present case. It was the case of the respondent that the appellant and her
election agent made extensive appeals to the religious symbol of cow and
calf and thereby committed corrupt practice under Section 123(3) of the RP
Act. Corrupt practice has been defined in that provision as under:
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person
with the consent of a candidate or his election agent to vote or
refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion,
race, caste, community or language or the use of, or appeal to
religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such
as the national flag or the national emblem, for the furtherance of
the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially
affecting the election of any candidate." It is the common case of
the parties that the symbol of cow and calf was allotted to the
Congress party by the Election Commission. The learned Counsel
for the respondent stated during the course of arguments in the
High Court that he confined his case only to the use of the symbol
of cow and calf. The learned Counsel gave up that part of the case
of the respondent wherein it had been alleged that appeals were
made to the religious symbol of cow and calf by the appellant. The
following proviso has now been inserted in Clause (3) of Section
123 by Section 8 of Act 40 of 1975:
Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a
candidate shall be deemed to be a religious symbol or a
national symbol for the purposes of this clause.
It is, therefore, apparent in view of the above proviso that the symbol of
cow and calf which was allotted to the appellant shall not be deemed to be a
religious symbol or a national symbol for the purpose of Section 123(3) of
the RP Act. The appellant as such cannot be deemed to have committed a
corrupt practice under Section 123(2) of the RP Act by use of the symbol of
cow and calf.
226. In assailing the validity of Act 40 of 1975 Mr. Shanti Bhushan has
referred to Section 10 of that Act, according to which the amendments
made by Sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Act in the RP Act shall have
retrospective operation, so as to apply to any election held before the
commencement of the Act in respect of which an election petition is pending
or in respect of which appeal from any order of the High Court is pending
immediately before the commencement of Act 40 of 1975. It is urged that a
change in the election law with retrospective effect strikes at the principle of
free and fair elections. Retrospective operation of the amending Act,
according to the learned Counsel, has the effect of condoning what was at
the time it was committed a corrupt practice.
227. I have given the matter my earnest consideration, and am of the
opinion that there is no substance in the above contention. A legislature
has, except in a matter for which there is prohibition like the one contained
in Article 20(1) of the Constitution, the power to make laws which are
prospective in operation as well as laws which have retrospective operation.
There is no limitation on the power of the legislature in this respect.
Essentially it is a matter relating to the capacity and competence of the
legislature. Although most of the laws made fey the legislature have a
prospective operation, occasions arise quite often when necessity is felt of
giving retrospective effect to a law. This holds good both in respect of a
principal Act as well as in respect of an amending Act. If the provisions of an
Act passed by the legislature are not violative of the provisions of the
Constitution, those provisions shall have to be given effect to and the fact
that : the operation of the Act is prospective or retrospective would make no
difference. It is also permissible to amend a law which is basis of the
decision of a court with retrospective effect. and rely upon the provisions of
the amended law in appeal against the above decision of the court. The
court of appeal in such an event gives full effect to the amended law even
though such amendment has been made after the decision of the original
court. The one field in which it is not permissible to make a law with
retrospective effect, is contained its Clause (1) of Article 20, according to
which no person shall be convicted of assay offence except for violation of a
law in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence,
nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been
inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.
Apart from the field in which there is a constitutional prohibition for giving
retrospective effect to a law, power of making amendment in law with
retrospective effect has now become a part of normal legislative process.
Question then arises as to whether in spite of the general competence of the
legislature to make a law with retrospective effect, is the legislature
rendered incompetent to make a law with retrospective effect in election
matters? The answer to this question, in my opinion, should plainly be in the
negative. Election laws are a part of the normal legislative process and what
is permitted in the matter of ordinary legislation would also be permissible
in the matter of legislation relating to elections unless there be some
provision in the Constitution which forbids such a course. We have not been
referred to any provision in the Constitution which has the effect of creating
a bar in the way of the legislature making a law relating to elections with
retrospective operation. If a party seeks to carve out an exception to the
normal rule, it can do so only on the basis of some cogent ground. No such
ground has been brought to our notice. The matter indeed is not res integra
because there have been two cases wherein this Court has upheld the
validity of the law making amendments in election laws with retrospective
effect,
228. The first such case was State of Orissa v. Bhupendra Kumar Bose
MANU/SC/0220/1961 : AIR1962SC945 . It arose out of elections to the
Cuttack Municipality held in December 1957 to March 1958 as a result of
which 27 appellants were declared elected as Councillors. The respondent,
who was defeated- at the elections, filed a writ petition -before the High
Court challenging the elections. The High Court held that the electoral rolls
had not been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Orissa
Municipalities Act, 1950, as the age qualification had been published too late
thereby curtailing the period of claims and objections to the preliminary roll
to 2 days from 21 days as prescribed. The High Court consequently set
aside the elections. The State took the view that the judgment affected not
merely the Cuttack Municipality but other municipalities also. Accordingly,
the Governor promulgated an Ordinance validating the elections to the
Cuttack Municipality and validating the electoral rolls prepared in respect of
various municipalities. The respondent thereupon filed a writ petition before
the High Court contending that the Ordinance was unconstitutional. The
High Court struck down the Ordinance. One of the grounds which weighed
with the High Court in striking down the Ordinance was that it contravened
Article 14 of the Constitution. The State and the councillors came up in
appeal to this Court. It was held by this Court that the Ordinance was valid
and that it successfully lured the invalidity of the electoral rolls and of
elections to the Cuttack Municipality. The Ordinance was further held not to
offend Article 14 of the Constitution as its object was not only to save the
elections to the Cuttack Municipality but also to other municipalities whose
validity might be challenged on similar grounds. The Ordinance, in the
opinion of the Court, did not single out the respondent for discriminatory
treatment. Gajendragadkar, J. (as he then was) speaking for the
Constitution Bench of this Court observed:
The Cuttack Municipal Elections had been set aside by the High
Court and if the Governor thought that in the public interest, having
regard to the factors enumerated in the preamble to the Ordinance,
it was necessary to validate the said elections, it would not
necessarily follow that the Ordinance suffers from the vice of
contravening Article 14." It was further observed:
therefore, if the infirmity in the electoral rolls on which the
decision of the High Court in the earlier writ petition was
based, had not been applicable to the electoral rolls in
regard to other Municipalities in the State of Orissa, then it
may have been open to the Governor to issue an Ordinance
only in respect of the Cuttack Municipal Elections, and if, on
account of special circumstances or reasons applicable to
the Cuttack Municipal Elections, a few was passed in
respect of the raid elections alone, It could not have been
challenged as unconstitutional under Article 14. Similarly, if
Mr. Bose was the only litigant affected by the decision and
as such formed a class by himself, it would have been open
to the Legislature to make a law only in respect of his case.
But as we have already pointed out, the Ordinance does
not purport to limit its operation only to the Cuttack
Municipality, it purports to validate the Cuttack Municipal
Elections and the electoral rolls in respect of other
Municipalities as well. therefore, we are satisfied that the
High Court was in error in coming to the conclusion that
Section 4 contravenes Article 14 of the Constitution.
229. In Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana MANU/SC/0275/1969 :
[1970]2SCR835 the dispute related to the election of the appellant to the
Rajasthan Legislative Assembly. The appellant in that case had been
appointed as a Special Government Pleader to represent the State of
Rajasthan in an arbitration case. The appellant then stood for election to the
State Legislative Assembly and was declared elected. The election of the
appellant was challenged inter alia on the ground that the appellant held an
office of profit within the meaning of Article 191(1) of the Constitution. The
High Court set aside the election of the appellant. The appellant then came
up in appeal to this Court. During the pendency of the appeal, Rajasthan Act
5 of 1969 was passed declaring among others that the holder of the office of
Special Government Pleader was not disqualified from being chosen or for
being a member of the State Legislative Assembly. The Act was made
retrospective and removed the appellant's disqualification retrospectively.
On the question as to whether the appellant was holding an office of profit
and hence was disqualified, Sikri, Ray and Reddy, JJ. held that the appellant
was not holding an office of profit. Hidayatullah, C.J. and Mitter, J., however,
held that the High Court was right in holding that the appellant held an
office of profit. All the five Judges constitution the Constitution Bench were,
however, unanimous on the point that the Act of 1969 had removed the
disqualification of the appellant retrospectively. Hidayatullah, C.J. speaking
for himself and Mitter, J. observed:
It is also well recognised that Parliament and Legislatures of the
States can make their laws operate retrospectively. Any law that
can be made prospectively may be made with retrospective
operation except that certain kinds of laws cannot operate
retroactively. This is not one of them.
This position being firmly grounded we have to look for limitations,
if any, in the Constitution. Article 191 (which has been quoted
earlier) itself recognises the power of the Legislature of the Slate to
declare by law that the holder of an office shall not be disqualified
for being chosen as a member. The Article says that a person shall
be disqualified if he holds an office of profit under the Government
of India or the Government of any State unless that office is
declared by the Legislature not to disqualify the holder. Power is
thus reserved to the Legislature of the State to make the
declaration. There is nothing in the words of the article to indicate
that this declaration cannot be made with retrospective effect.
It was further observed:
Regard being had to the legislative practice in this country and in
the absence of a clear prohibition either express or implied we are
satisfied that the Act cannot be declared ineffective in its
retrospective operation.
Sikri. J. (as he then was) speaking for himself, Ray, J. (as he then
was) and Reddy, J. dealt with the matter in the following words:
Mr. Chagla, learned Counsel for the respondent, contends
that the Rajasthan State Legislature was not competent 'to
declare retrospectively' under Article 191(1)(a) of the
Constitution. It seems to us that there is no force in this
contention. It has been held in numerous cases by this
Court that the State Legislatures and Parliament can
legislate retrospectively subject to the provisions of the
Constitution. Apart from the question of fundamental
rights, no express restriction has been placed on the power
of the Legislature of the State, and we are unable to imply,
in the context, any restriction. Practice of the British
Parliament does not oblige us to place any implied
restriction. We notice that the British Parliament in one
case validated the election : (Erskine May's Treatise on the
Law Privileges Proceedings and Usage of Parliament-
Seventeenth (1964) Edition)
'After the general election of 1945 it was found that the
persons elected for the Coatbridge Division of Lanark and
the Spring-bourn Division of Glassgow were disqualified at
the time of their election because they were members of
tribunals appointed by the Minister under the Rent of
Furnished Houses Control (Scotland) Act, 1943, which
entitled them to a small fee in respect of attendance at a
Tribunal. A Select Committee reported that the
disqualification was incurred inadvertently, and in
accordance with their recommendation the Coatbridge and
Springbourn Elections (Validation). Bill was introduced to
validate the irregular elections (H. C. Deb. (1945-46) 414, c. 564-6). (See also H.C. 3 (1945-46); ibid, 71 (1945-46) and ibid 92 (1945-46)).'
We have also noticed two earlier instances of retrospective
legislation, e.g. , the House of Commons (Disqualification) Act,
1813 (Halsbury Statutes of England p. 467) and Section 2 of the
Re-election of Ministers Act; 1919 (ibid p. 515).
Great stress was laid on the word 'declare' in Article 191(1)(a), but
we are unable to imply any limitation on the powers of the
Legislature from this word. Declaration can be made effective as
from an earlier date.
230. The above two authorities of this Court clearly lend support for the
view that it is permissible to amend a law relating to elections with
retrospective operation. Mr. Shanti Bhushan has criticised the observations
of Sikri, J. reproduced above on the score that in the United Kingdom
amendments in election law have not been made to affect pending
proceedings in courts. This is essentially a matter for the legislature to
decide, this does not affect the competence of the legislature to make a
change in election law with retrospective effect. In any case, the proposition
of law laid down in the case of Kanta Kathuria MANU/SC/0275/1969 :
[1970]2SCR835 is binding upon us and I do not find any reason to detract
either from the soundness of the view expressed therein or its binding
effect.
231. The Privy Council also upheld in the case of Arevesekera v. Jayalilaka
1932 AC 260 an Order in Council giving retrospective effect to an election
law in Ceylon. This question arose in the following circumstances. An Order
in Council of 1923 made provision as to the Legislative Council in Ceylon,
but reserve to His Majesty power to revoke, alter or amend the Order. The
appellant, as common  informer, brought an action to recover penalties
under the Order from the respondent, who he alleged had sat and voted
after his seat had become vacant under its provisions by reason of his
having a pecuniary interest in a contract with the Government. In 1928,
after the action had been brought, but before its trial, an amending Order in
Council was made providing that the action should be dismissed, it also
amended the Order of 1923 so as to except the office held by the
respondent from its operation. It was held that the Order of 1928 was valid,
having regard to the power reserved by the Order of 1923, and was an
effective defence to the action, although it was retrospective in its
operation. Lord Darling in the above context observed:
It was argued that the Order in Council of November 1, 1928, was
ultra vires as affecting to take away rights already in existence,
thus having a retrospective action. The effect, however, of the
Order of 1928, as expressed on the face of it, was no more than an
act of indemnity and relief in respect of penalties incurred. It may
be true that 'not Jove himself upon the past hath power', but
legislators have certain the right to prevent, alter or reverse the
consequences of their own decrees. There is no necessity to give
instances to prove that they have frequently done so, even going so
far as to restore the heritable quality to blood which had been
deprived of its virtue by Acts of attainder.
232. I am not impressed by the argument that retrospective operation, of
the relevant provisions of Act 40 of 1975 affects (sic)fred and fair elections.
'The said provisions of Act 40 of 1975 are general in terms and would apply
to all election disputes which may be pending either in the High Court or in
appeal before the Supreme Court or which may arise in future. It is no
doubt true that the retrospective operation of an amending Act has the
effect of placing one of the parties to the dispute in a more advantageous
position compared to others but that is inevitable in most of the
amendments with retrospective operation. This Court in the case of Harbhajan Singh v. Mohan Singh MANU/SC/0006/1974 : [1975]1SCR605 dealt with the provisions of Section 3 of the Punjab Preemption (Repeal) Act,
1973, according to which on and from the date of commencement of that
Act, no court shall pass a decree in any suit for pre-emption. This Court held
that the above provision was also applicable to appeals which were pending
at the commen cement of that Act as an appeal was in the nature of a re-
hearing, and as such even if the suit had been decreed by the trial court,
the suit was liable to be dismissed because of the coming into force of the
Punjab Preemption (Repeal) Act during the pendency of the appeal, it is
plain that only those vendees obtained the benefit of the above Act who had
filed appeals against the decree awarded against them in pre-emption suit.
Vendees in other cases who did not file appeal against the decrees awarded
against them in view of the then existing law had to lose the purchased
property and thus be at a disadvantage. That fact, however, did not prevent
this Court from giving effect to the amendment. Whenever a legislature
makes a law or amends a law, it has to indicate the time from which it
would come into effect. This is essentially a matter for the legislature and
the court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the legislature. The
fact that the change in law is made applicable to pending cases and the
classification treats the decided cases as belonging to one category and
pending cases as belonging to another category is not offensive to Article 14 (see Anant Mills v. State of Gujarat. MANU/SC/0381/1975 : [1975]3SCR220 . Nor can the court interfere on the score of the propriety of giving
retrospective effect to an amendment made in an election law. Indeed, the
question of propriety is a matter which is entirely for the legislature to think
of and decide. It cannot affect the validity of the law. This Court in the case
of Kanta Kathuria (supra) expressly rejected the contention that amendment
in election law was void because it gave advantage to a party. Hidayatullah,
C.J. observed in this context:
It is true that it gave an advantage to those who stand when the
disqualification was not so removed as against those, who may
have kept themselves back because the disability was not removed.
That might raise questions of the propriety of such retrospective
legislation but not of the capacity to make such laws.
Likewise, Sikri, J. expressly rejected the contention that retrospective
amendment in election law was bad because it was not a healthy practice
and because such a course was liable to be abused in the following words:
The apprehension that it may, not be a healthy practice and this
power might be abused in a particular case are again no grounds
for limiting the powers of the State Legislature.
233. The above observations also pro-vide an answer to the contention of
Mr. Shanti Bhushan that the provisions of the amendment made by Act 40 of
1975 can be abused. I may state that in case the provisions of the amended
law are abused, and some of the instances of abuse were visualized by Mr.
Shanti Bhushan during the course of arguments, this Court would not be
helpless in the matter. The proper course in such an event would be to strike
down the action taken under the amended law and not the law itself.
234. Reference was also made by Mr. Shanti Bhushan to the effect of
retrospective amendment in cases which may arise under Section 123(1) of
the RP Act. We are in the present case not concerned with Section 123(1) of
the RP Act and consequently it is not necessary to express any opinion with
regard to the impact of the amendment upon Section 123(1) of the RP Act.
Nor is it necessary to express opinion on the point as to whether it is
permissible to make a law which has the effect of creating a corrupt practice
or disqualification retrospectively and thus unseating a returned candidate
as such a question does not : arise in this case.
235. The change in the definition of the word "candidate" to which our
attention has been invited by Mr. Shanti Bhushan does not impinge upon the
process of free and fair elections. The fact that as a result of the above
change, we have to take into account only the prejudicial activity of the
candidate or his election agent from the date of the nomination of the
candidate and not from the date he holds himself out as a candidate does
not affect the process of free and fair elections. It is necessary while dealing
with corrupt practice relating to elections to specify the period within which
the impugned act, alleged to constitute corrupt practice should have been
done. As a result of the amendment, the legislature has fixed the said
period to be as from the date of nomination instead of the period as from
the date on which the candidate with the election in prospect began to hold
himself out as a prospective candidate. It is common experience that the
date from which a candidate holds himself out as a prospective candidate is
often a matter of controversy between the parties. The result is that an
element of indefiniteness and uncertainty creeps in in finding the date from
which a person can be said to be candidate. As a result of the change in the
definition of candidate, the legislature has fixed a definite date, viz., that of
nomination, instead of the earlier time which had an element of
indefiniteness and uncertainty about it for finding as to when a person
became a candidate. Certainty is an essential desideratum in Jaw and any
amendment of law to achieve that object is manifestly a permissible piece of
legislation. The choice of date was a matter for the legislature to decide and
the court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the legislature in this
respect, more so, when whatever be the choice of date, has aspects of both
pros and cons. The date of nomination is normally, as in the present case,
about a month before the date of polling and it is plain that most of the acts
of corrupt practice are committed during this period. In any case, as
mentioned above, the court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the
legislature in the choice of date. The choice of date, as observed in the case
of Union of India v. Parameshwaran Match Works MANU/SC/0094/1974 :
1978(2)ELT436(SC) as a basis for classification cannot always be dubbed as
arbitrary even if no particular reason is forthcoming for the choice unless it.
is shown to be capricious or whimsical in the circumstances. When it is seen
that a line or a point there must be and there is no mathematical or logical
way of finding it precisely, the decision of the legislature or its delegate
must be accepted unless we can say that it is very wide of any reasonable
mark.
236. One of the objects of the change effected by Act 40 of 1975 is to
remove the uncertainty and set at rest the controversy as to what would be
the precise date of a person in the service of the Central Government
ceasing to be in such service in case he tenders his resignation. The
amended law makes it clear that where the date of taking effect of the
resignation is stated in the publication in the Official Gazette, it shall be that
date. Similarly, in the case of appointment of a person, the date of taking
effect of such appointment shall be the date mentioned in the publication in
the Official Gazette in case such a date is stated in such publication. The fact
that the new provision creates a conclusive presumption with regard to the
date of taking effect of appointment or resignation does not mean, as is
sought to be argued on behalf of the respondent, that there has been an
encroachment by the legislature upon the judicial sphere. Laying down a
rule of conclusive 'presumption in a statute with a view to remove
uncertainty with regard to the date of the taking effect of appointment or
resignation of a Government employee cannot be characterised as an
assumption of judicial power by the legislature. Another object of the
change effected by Act 40 of 1975 is that a candidate who is bound, in view
of para 8 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968
to use the party symbol allotted by the Election Commission and who cannot
use any other symbol, shall not suffer and be guilty of corrupt practice
under Section 123(3) of the RP Act because of the use of that symbol. It is
to be assumed that Election Commission which is an independent body,
would act fairly and properly and would not allot a symbol, which is a
religious symbol, to a party or a candidate. The fact that the allotted symbol
was one of those suggested by the party concerned would not relieve the
Election Commission of its duty to see that it does not allot a religious
symbol to that party. Assuming that the Election Commission makes an
error of judgment in this respect and allots a symbol which, in fact, is a
religious symbol, the object of the new provision is that a candidate should
not be penalised because of such an error on the part of the Election
Commission. The third object of the change effected by Act 40 of 1975 is
that a candidate should not suffer or be held guilty of corrupt practice
because of any act done by any person in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in Section 123(7) of the RP
Act in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty. None of the
three objects mentioned above has any taint of unconstitutionality and I find
it difficult to hold that the impugned provisions impinge upon the principle of
free and fair elections.
237. So far as the newly added proviso to Section 123(7) is concerned, it
may be stated that the act in the discharge or purported discharge of official
duty of the Government employees referred to above would in the very
nature of things have to be of a kind which is germane to their official
duties. It may include steps taken by the Government employees for
maintenance of law and order or in connection with the security of a
candidate or other persons. It would not, however, include canvassing or
doing such acts which may properly be considered to be part of the election
propaganda for furtherance of the prospects of a candidate's election. In
taking action under the above provision, it must be borne in mind as stated
on page 152 of Free Elections by W.J.M. Mackenzie that in the last resort
"the system of free elections depends on a certain separation of powers
between administrators (or policemen) and politicians : there must be some
public sense that police and administration serve the public, not the party
leaders." What would be permissible under the above provision would be
that which is conceived to be done in public interest and not something
conceived to be done in the personal interest of a candidate. In spite of
some difficulty which may arise in borderline cases, this distinction must be
borne in mind. If, however, because of doing something conceived in public
interest, e. g., as in the present case the security arrangement for the
person holding the office of the Prime Minister, some advantage may also
possibly accrue to a candidate, it will have to be regarded as incidental and
would not detract from action taken under the above provision being in
public interest. As against that, any action taken with a view to further the
personal interest of a candidate should not be allowed to be camouflaged as
an action taken in public interest. Care must be taken to ensure that public
interest is not allowed to degerrate into a cloak for furtherance of the
personal interests of a candidate in an election. The discharge or purported
discharge of official duty must necessarily have public interest and not the
personal interest of a candidate as its basis. The courts while dealing with
the newly added proviso to Section 123(7) should construe it, if reasonably
possible, in such a manner as would sustain the validity of that proviso. In
case there lis abuse of the above provision, the proper course, as already
mentioned, would be to strike down the action taken under the proviso and
not the proviso itself.
238. One other change brought about by Act 40 of 1975 is the addition of
an explanation in Section 77 of the RP Act. According to the new
explanation, any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements
made, facilities provided or any other act or thing done by any person in the
service of the Government and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in
Clause (7) of Section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his
official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed
to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorized by a
candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of 'Section 77(1). The
validity of the above explanation in a great measure is linked with the
validity of the new proviso to Section 123(7) of the RP Act, and for the
reasons stated for upholding the proviso to Section 123(7), the new
explanation to Section 77, it seems, may have also to be upheld. It is not
necessary to dilate upon this aspect because even without invoking the aid
of the new explanation to Section 77, the High Court has found, and J see
no reason to disturb that finding, that the total expenses incurred by the
appellant were loss than the prescribed limit. (Contd. on Col. 2) (i) The
hiring charges of the vehicles specified in para 13(1) (ii) Cost of petrol and
diesel for the vehicles specified in para 13(1)(iii) Payments made to the
drivers of vehicles specified in para 13(1) (iv) Repairing and servicing
charges of vehicles specified in para 13(1)(v) Payments made to the
workers engaged for the purpose of election propaganda (vi) Expenses on
the erection of rostrums for the public meetings addressed by the appellant
in the constituency on February 1 and 25, 1971 (vii) Expenses on
arrangement of loud-speakers for the various election meetings of the
appellant addressed on February 1 and 25, 1971 (viii) Expenses on motor
transport for the conveyance of the appellant and her party to the place of
her election meetings on February 1 and 25, 1971
239. Argument has also been advanced that validity of Act 40 of 1975
cannot be assailed on the ground that it strikes at she basic structure of the
Constitution, Such limitation, it is submitted, operates upon as amendment
of the Constitution under Article 368 but it does not hold good when
Parliament enacts a statute in exercise of powers under Article 245 of the
Constitution. In view of my finding that the provisions of Act 40 of 1975 with
which we are concerned have not been shown to impinge upon the process
of free and fair elections and thereby to strike at the basic structure of the
Constitution, it is not necessary to deal with the above argument- I would,
therefore, hold that the provisions of Act 40 of 1975 with which we are
concerned are valid and do not suffer from any Constitutional infirmity.
240. We may now deal with cross appeal No. 909 of 1975. Mr. Shanti
Bhushan has not pressed the challenge to the findings of the High Court on
issues 4 and 7. He has, however, assailed the finding of the High Court on
issue No. 9 whereby the High Court held that the appellant incurred an
expenditure of Rs. 31,976.47 on her election as against the prescribed limit
of Rs. 35,000. In Ex. 5, Return of her election expenses, the appellant
showed her total election expenses to be Rs. 12,892.97. The respondent in
para 13 of the election petition alleged that the appellant and her election
agent had incurred expenditure much beyond the prescribed limit of Rs.
35,000 and thereby committed corrupt practice under Section 123(6) of the
RP Act. The respondent gave some items of the expenditure which were
alleged to have been incurred by the appellant and her election agent but
were not shown in the return of the election expenses. The mate-trial items
with which we are now concerned were as under:
The High Court held that the respondent had failed to prove the first five
items. As regards the expenses for the erection of rostrums for the public
meetings addressed by the appellant on February 1 and 25, 1971, the High
Court found that four meetings were addressed by the appellant in the
constituency on February 1 and six meetings on February 25, 1971. The
cast of a rostrum in each meeting came to Rs. 1,600/-, The total expenses
of the ten rostrums thus came to Rs. 16,000 and the same, it was held, was
liable to be added to the amount shown in the return of election expenses of
the appellant. The amount of Rs. 16,000 included the money paid by the
District Congress Committee as its share of the cost of rostrums. Regarding
the expenses of loudspeakers, the High Court found that the total expenses
of Rs. 800 had been incurred on the installation of loudspeakers in the
meetings addressed by the appellant on February 1 and 25, 1971. in
addition to that, the High Court added Rs. 1,151 as cost of energy supplied
for the functioning of the loudspeakers. The total amount which was added
to the election expenses of the appellant on account of the loudspeakers
thus came to Rs. 1,951. An amount of Rs. 232.50 was found by the High
Court to have been incurred by the appellant for her transport on February 1
and 25, 1971. Adding the aggregate of Rs. 16,000, Rs. 1,951 and Rs.
232.50, in all Rs. 18,183.50, to the figure of Rupees 12,892,97 which had
been shown by the appellant in her return, the total expense incurred by the
appellant on her election was found by the High Court to be Rs. 31,976.47.
241. In appeal before us Mr. Shanti Bhushan has assailed the finding of the
High Court in so far as the High Court has not accepted the case of the
respondent that the appellant incurred expenses on the cost of hiring, petrol
and the salary of the drivers for 23 vehicles. It. may be mentioned that the
respondent in para 13 of the election petition referred to 32 vehicles which
were alleged to have been hired by the appellant, but both before the High
Court and in appeal before us, learned Counsel for the respondent has
confined his argument to 23 vehicles.
242. To appreciate the point of controversy between the parties, it may be
necessary to set out some material facts. Section 160 of the RP Act provides
for inter alia that if it appears to the State Government that in connection
with an election held within the State, any vehicle is needed or is likely to be
needed for the purpose of transport of ballot boxes to or from any polling
station, or transport of members of the police force for maintaining order
during the conduct of such election, or transport of any officer or other
person for performance of any duties in connection with such election, the
Government may by order in writing requisition such vehicle, provided that
no vehicle which is being lawfully used by a candidate or his agent for any
purpose connected with the election of such candidate shall be requisitioned
until the completion of the poll at such election. It appears that 23 vehicles,
described at some places as cars and at other places as jeeps, were
requisitioned by the district authorities Rae Bareli for election purposes
under the above provision. On February 23, 1971 Dal Bahadur Singh, who
was the President of the District Congress Committee Rae Bareli, addressed
a letter to the District Officer Rae Bareli praying that the above mentioned
23 vehicles, of which the numbers were given, had been taken by the
District Congress Committee Rae Bareli for the Parliamentary constituencies
of Rae Bareli, Amethi and Ram Sanehi Ghat. There are, it may be stated,
seven Assembly constituencies in Rae Bareli district. Out of them, five
Assembly constituencies constitute Rae Bareli Parliamentary constituency.
One of the Assembly constituencies in Rae Bareli district is part of Ram
Sanehi Ghat Parliamentary constituency, while the seventh Assembly
constituency is part of Amethi Parliamentary constituency. On February 24,
1971 a reply was sent on behalf of the District Election Officer to Dal
Bahadur Singh regarding the latter's request for release of 23 vehicles. It
was pointed out in the reply that it was not possible to release the vehicles
in favour of any party for election purposes, At the same time, it was
mentioned that the question of releasing of the vehicles could be considered
at the request of a' candidate or his election agent. On receipt of the above
reply. Dai Bahadur Singh sent the same to Yashpal Kapur on February 24,
1971 along with note A43, the material part of which reads as under:
You are requested to kindly write a letter with your
recommendation to the Election Officer so that the cars taken by
the District Congress Committee may be released, I have tried to
find out Shri Vidyadhar Vajpayee who is contesting the election
from Amethi Parliamentary Constituency and Shri Baiznath Kureel
who is contesting the election from Ram Sanehi Parliamentary
Constituency, but they are not available. You are, therefore,
requested to write the above letter to the District Election Officer
positively so that the election. work of all the three Parliamentary
Constituencies which is going on, on behalf of District Congress
Committee, may not suffer."
On February 25, 1971 Yashpal Kapur addressed a letter to the District
Officer Rae Bareli stating that the 23 vehicles in question had been taken by
the. District Congress Committee Rae Bareli for the three Parliamentary
constituencies of Rae Bareli, Amethi and Ram Sanehi Ghat. The District
Officer was requested to release the 23 vehicles without delay. Yashpal
Kapur also enclosed with that letter the note of Dal Bahadur Singh. The 23
vehicles, it would appear, were thereafter released by the District Election
Officer. The appellant, in para 17(b) of her written statement, admitted that
those 23 vehicles were used by the District Congress Committee Rae Bareli
for election work in the three Parliamentary constituencies of Rae Bareli,
Amethi and Ram Sanehi Ghat. The High Court, in not, accepting the case of
the respondent in respect of the 23 vehicles, observed that there was
nothing to show that the above mentioned vehicles had been obtained on
hire or were obtained gratis. There was also, according to the High Court, no
cogent material to show that the said vehicles had been engaged and used
in connection with election work of the appellant.
243. Mr. Shanti Bhushan, while assailing the finding of the High Court, has
submitted that, as five out. of the seven Assembly constituencies in Rae
Bareli district were in Rae Bareli Parliamentary constituency, five-seventh of
the expenses incurred on the said 23 vehicles should be added to the
election expenses of the appellant. I find it difficult to accede to the above
submission because of the paucity of the material on record. There is no
cogent evidence to show that the 23 vehicles In question were used for the
election of the appellant. It is no doubt true that the said 23 vehicles were
used by the District Congress Committee Rae Bareli for election work in the
three Parliamentary constituencies, viz., Rae Bareli, Amethi and Ram Sanehi
Ghat. The record is, however, silent on the point as to what extent they
were used in Rae Bareli Parliamentary constituency. One can in the above
context visualise three possibilities:
(i) As the appellant, who was the Prime Minister of the country, was
contesting from Rae Bareli constituency, the District Congress
Committee concentrated its attention on that constituency and used
the 23 vehicles mostly for the election work in that constituency.
(ii) As the appellant had a mass appeal the District Congress
Committee office-bearers thought that the Rae Bareli constituency
was very safe and, therefore, concentrated attention on the other
two Parliamentary constituencies and used the 23 vehicles mostly
for those two constituencies.
(iii) Equal attention was paid to all the three constituencies and
there was proportionate use of the vehicles for the three
constituencies.
Mr. Shanti Bhushan would have us to accept the first or the third possibility
and would rule out the second. If so, it was, in my opinion, essential for the
respondent to lead some evidence regarding the use of the 23 vehicles. He
did nothing of the kind. Neither the owners nor the drivers of those vehicles
were examined as witnesses. There was also, as mentioned earlier, no other
cogent evidence to show that those vehicles or any of them were used for
the appellant's election in the Rae Bareli constituency, and if so, to what
extent. The respondent himself did not come into the witness box to
substantiate the charge against the appellant regarding the use of the 23
vehicles. The fact that Dal Bahadur Singh was not examined as a witness on
behalf of the appellant would not warrant the filling in of the gaps and
lacunae in the evidence adduced by the respondent by a process akin to
guess work. It is no doubt true that by using a vehicle for the furtherance of
the prospects of candidates in more than one constituency one should not
be allowed to circumvent the salutary provisions of the RP Act in this
respect. To prevent such circumvention, it is essential that evidence should
be led to show as to what was the extent of the user of the vehicle in the
constituency concerned. In Hans Raj v. Pt. Hari Ram 1968 ELR SC 125 a
jeep hired by the Congress Committee during elections was used in more
than one constituency, including that of the returned candidate who was a
Congress nominee. Question arose as to whether the expense incurred in
connection with that jeep could be included in the election expenses of the
returned candidate. While answering the question in the negative,
Hidayatullah, C.J. observed:
The bill stands in the name of the Congress Committee and was
presumably paid by the Congress Committee also. The evidence,
however, is that this jeep was used on behalf of the returned
candidate and to that extent we subscribe to the finding given by
the learned judge. Even if it be held that the candidate was at
bottom the hirer of the jeep and the expenditure on it must be
included in his account, the difficulty is that this jeep was used also
for the general Congress propaganda in other constituencies. As we
stated, the jeep remained in Chalet and at Mubarakpur. No doubt
Chalet is the home town of the returned candidate and his office
was situated at Mubarakpur but that does not indicate that the jeep
was used exclusively on his account. The petrol chart shows that
petrol was bought at several pumps, both inside the constituency
and outside. This shows, as does the evidence, that the jeep was
used not only in this constituency but also in the other
constituencies. If this be true, the, it is almost impossible on the
evidence as it exists in this case to decide how much of the use
went for the benefit of the returned candidate and how much for
the use of candidates in the other constituencies also put up by the
Congress Committee. In this situation it is difficult to say that the
whole of the benefit of the jeep went to the returned candidate and
once we hold that the entire benefit did not go to him, we are not in
a position to allocate the expenses between him and the other
candidates in the other constituencies.
244. Reference has also been made during the course of arguments by Mr.
Shanti Bhushan to some entries in a register of the Congress Committee.
The High Court declined to place any reliance on those entries astnose
entries had not been proved. I see no cogent ground to take a different
view. Our attention has been invited by Mr. Shanti Bhushan to a report in
issue dated January 22, 1971 of Swantantra Bharat wherein there was a
reference to the Personal Secretary of the Prime Minister having reached
Rae Bareli with a caravan of 70 motor vehicles. No reliance can be placed
upon that report as the correspondent who sent that report was sot
examined as a witness.
245. The other difficulty winch I find In accepting the submission of Mr.
Shanti Bhushan in respect of 23 vehicles is that there is no evidence to show
that any payment 'was made for the use of the above mentioned vehicles.
There is also nothing to show that those vehicles were engaged on hire. As
mentioned earlier, the owners and drivers of those vehicles were not
examined as witnesses. I, therefore, find no sufficient ground to interfere
with the finding of the High Court in respect of the above mentioned 23
vehicles.
246. Mr. Shanti Bhushan has next as-sailed the finding of the High Court in
so far as it has held that the respondent has failed to prove that the
appellant incurred an expense of Rs. 6,600 on workers engaged for the
purposes of election propaganda. I, however, find no infirmity in the finding
of the High Court in this respect as there is no cogent evidence whatsoever
that any expense was incurred for engaging workers for the election work of
the appellant. The case of the appellant is that her workers did the work
voluntarily and without receipt of any remuneration.
247. Apart from challenging the findings of the High Court in respect of 23
vehicles and the alleged payment to workers, Mr. Shanti Bhushan has also
referred to some other circumstances with a view to show that ,the election
expenses of the appellant exceeded the prescribed amount of Rs. 35,000. It
has been pointed out that a cheque for Rs. 70,000 was sent by the
Provincial Congress Committee to Dal Bahadur Singh, President of the
District Congress Committee Rae Bareli, and the same was credited in Dal
Bahadur Singh's account after deducting of the bank charges on March 4,
1971. Dal Bahadur Singh withdrew out of that amount Rs. 40,000 and Rs.
25,000 on March 4 and 6, 1971 respectively near about the days of polling.
It is urged that the said amount must have been spent for the purpose of
the elections. There was no reference to the said amount of Rs. 70,000 in
the petition. There is also no reference to the amount of Rs. 70,000 in the
judgment of the High Court or in the grounds of appeal. As such, I am of the
view that the respondent should not be allowed to set up a case against the
appellant on the basis of the bank entries in the account of Dal Bahadur
Singh. Reference has further been made by Mr. Shanti Bhushan to the
expenses which were alleged to have been incurred on the telephone
charges and the meetings addressed by Yashpal Kapur. The High Court
rejected the submission in this respect on behalf of the respondent in the
following words:
Learned Counsel for the petitioner urged that from the evidence on
record, it transpires that expenditure was also incurred on the
telephone connection and telephone charges, on the meetings
addressed by Sri Yashpal Kapur within the Constituency during the
period of election, on the election material viz. pamphlets, posters,
etc. and on the lighting arrangements made for some meetings
addressed by the respondent No. 1. According to learned Counsel,
these expenses are also liable to be added to the election expenses
of the respondent No. 1. None of these expenses were, however,
pleaded in the petition. In fact, till the commencement of the
arguments in the case, the respondent No. 1 could not even
anticipate that the petitioner shall rely on these expenses for the
purpose of his case. It will, therefore, be prejudicial to the interest
of respondent No. 1 if the aforesaid expenses are taken in
consideration. The submission made by learned Counsel for the
petitioner is accordingly negatived."
I am in full agreement with the above observations of the High Court and
find no cogent ground to take a different view.
248. In may be stated that In view of the new explanation added to Section
77 of the RP Act by Act 40 of 1975, the amount of Rs. 12,000 which
represented 75 per cent of the expenditure incurred on the construction of
10 rostrums home by the Government, cannot be included in the total
election expenses of the appellant. The High Court was also inclined to hold
that the said amount of Rs. 12,000 could not he included in the appellant's
expenses. The High Court however, included the total amount of Rs. 16,000
in the election expenses of the appellant upon the assumption that the
appellant had not disavowed that expenditure. Be that as it may, the fact
remains that the High Court has found on issue No. 9 that the total
expenses incurred by the appellant on her election have not been shown to
exceed the prescribed limit. I find no cogent reason to interfere with that
finding.
249. I also agree with the High Court that as the election expenses of the
appellant have not been shown to exceed the prescribed limit of Rs. 35,000,
the question of invoking and going into the validity of Act 58 of 1974 does
not arise. Nor is it necessary to express an opinion about the view taken in
Kanwarlal v. Amarnath Chawla MANU/SC/0277/1974 : [1975]2SCR259 in
view of the fact that even after applying the rule laid down in that case, the
total election expense of the appellant has not been shown to exceed the
prescribed limit.
250. So far as the finding of the High Court on issue No. 6 regarding the use
of the symbol of cow and calf is concerned, the matter, as already discussed
earlier, is now covered by the amendment made in Section 123(1) of the RP
Act by Section 8 of Act 40 of 1975.
251. There was a controversy during the course of arguments on the point
as to whether I have laid down in my judgment in Kesavananda Bharati's
case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 that fundamental rights are
not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. As this controversy
cropped up a number of times, it seems apposite that before I conclude I
should deal with the contention advanced by learned Solicitor General that
according to my judgment in that case no fundamental right is part of the
basic structure of the Constitution. I find it difficult to read anything in that
judgment to justify such a conclusion.
What has been laid down in that judgment is that no article of the
Constitution is immune from the amendatory process because of the fact
that it relates to a fundamental right and is contained in Part III of the
Constitution.
It was also held that a Constitutional amendment under Article 368 does not
constitute "law" as mentioned in Article 13. I also did not agree with the
view taken in the case of Golaknath that there was a limitation on the power
of Parliament to amend the provisions of Part III of the Constitution so as to
abridge or take away the fundamental rights. I thereafter dealt with the
scope of the power of amendment under Article 368 and the connotation of
the word "amendment" and said in this context :
I am further of the opinion that amendment of the Constitution
necessarily contemplates that the Constitution has not to be
abrogated, but only changes have to be made in it. The word
'amendment' postulates that the old Constitution survives without
loss of identity despite the change and continues even though it has
been subjected to alterations. As a result of the amendment, the
old Constitution cannot be destroyed and done away with, it is
retained though in the amended form. What the is meant by the
retention of the old Constitution? It means the retention of the
basic structure or framework of the old Constitution. A mere
retention of some provisions of the old Constitution even though the
basic structure or framework of the Constitution has been destroyed
would not amount to the retention of the old Constitution. Although
it is permissible under the power of amendment to effect changes,
however important, and to adopt the system to the requirements of
changing conditions, it is not permissible to touch the foundation or
to alter the basic institutional pattern. the words 'amendment of the
Constitution' with all their wide sweep and amplitude cannot have
the effect of destroying or abrogating the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution. It would not be competent under the
garb of amendment, for instance, to change the democratic
government into dictatorship or hereditary monarchy nor would it
be permissible to abolish the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. The
secular character of the State according to which the State shall not
discriminate against any citizen on the ground of religion only
cannot likewise be done away with. Provision regarding the
amendment of the Constitution does not furnish a pretence for
subverting the structure of the Constitution nor can Article 368 be
so construed as to embody the death wish of the Constitution or
provides sanction for what may perhaps be called its lawful harakiri.
Such subversion or destruction cannot be described to be
amendment of the Constitution as contemplated by Article 368.
It was further observed by me:
The word 'amendment' in Article 368 must carry the same meaning
whether the amendment relates to taking away or abridging
fundamental rights in Part III of the Constitution or whether it
pertains to some other provision outside Part III of the Constitution.
No serious objection is taken to repeal, addition or alteration of
provisions of the Constitution other than those in Part III under the
power of amendment conferred by Article 368. The same approach,
in my opinion, should hold good when we deal with amendment
relating to fundamental rights contained in Part III of the
Constitution. It would be impermissible to differentiate between
scope and width of power of amendment when it deals with
fundamental rights and the scope and width of that power when it
deals with provisions not concerned with fundamental rights.
It would appear from the above that no distinction was made by me so far
as the ambit and scope of the power of amendment is concerned between a
provision relating to fundamental rights and provisions dealing with matters
other than fundamental rights. The limitation inherent in the word
"amendment" according to which it is not permissible by amendment of the
Constitution to change the basic structure of the Constitution was to operate
equally on articles pertaining to fundamental rights as on other articles not
pertaining to those rights. This was further made clear by the following
observations on page 688:
Subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution. I have no doubt that the power of amendment is
plenary and would include within itself the power to add, alter or
repeal the various article deluding those relating to fundamental
rights.
Proposition (vii) of the summary of my conclusions on page 758 of the
judgment also bears it out and the same reads as under:
(vii) The power of amendment under Article 368 does not include
power to abrogate the Constitution nor does it include the power to
alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution. Subject
to the retention of the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and includes
within itself the power to amend the various articles of the
Constitution, including those relating to fundamental rights as well
as those which may be said to relate to essential features. No part
of a fundamental right can claim immunity from amendatory
process by being described as the essence or core of that right. The
power of amendment would also include within itself the power to
add, alter or repeal the various articles.
252. It has been stated by me on page 685 of the judgment (already
reproduced above) that the secular character of the State according to
which the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on the ground of
religion only cannot likewise be done away with. The above observations
show that the secular character of the Constitution and the rights
guaranteed by Article 15 pertain to the basic structure of the Constitution.
The above observations clearly militate against the contention that
according to my judgment fundamental rights are not a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. I also dealt with the matter at length to show
that the right to property was not a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution. This would have been wholly unnecessary if none of the
fundamental rights was a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
253. Before parting with this case I must acknowledge the assistance we
received from the learned Counsel for the parties as also from learned
Attorney General and Solicitor General in resolving the points of controversy.
In spite of the political overtones, the case was argued forcefully yet without
generating any heat and in an atmosphere of befitting calmness. It has been
said by Holmes, J. that great cases like hard cases make bad law. For great
cases are called great not by reason of their real importance in shaping the
law of the future, but because of some accident of immediate overwhelming
interest, which appeals to the feelings and distorts the judgment. These
immediate interests exercise a kind of hydraulic pressure (Northern
Securities Co. v. U.S. ) (1903) 193 US 197. It, therefore, became essential
to rid the case of all the embellishments resulting from the political
overtones and to bring it to a level which is strictly judicial, so that the
various Constitutional and legal aspects of the matter may be examined in a
dispassionate atmosphere. Learned Counsel for the parties made a
significant contribution towards the attainment of this objective. It may not
be inappropriate in the above context to reproduce what was said by one of
us (Khanna, J.) in Kesavananda Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 : That all Constitutional interpretations have political consequences
should not obliterate the fact that the decision has to be arrived at
in the calm and dispassionate atmosphere of the court room, that
judges in order to give legitimacy to their decision have to keep
aloof from the din and controversy of politics and that the
fluctuating fortunes of rival political parties can have for them only
academic interest. Their primary duty is to uphold the Constitution
and the laws without fear or favour and in doing so, they cannot
allow any political ideology or economic theory, which may have
caught their fancy, to colour the decision.
254. As a result of the above, I accept appeal No. 887 of 1975 filed by
Shrimati Indira Nehru Gandhi, set aside the judgment of the High Court in
so far as it has found the appellant guilty of corrupt practice under Section
123(7) of the RP Act and has declared her election to the Lok Sabha to be
void. The order that the appellant shall accordingly stand disqualified for a
period of six years as provided in Section 8-A would also consequently be
set aside. The election petition filed by the respondent shall stand
dismissed. Appeal No. 909 of 1975 filed by Shri Raj Narain is dismissed.
Looking to all the circumstances, more particularly the fact that the election
petition filed by the respondent is being dismissed because of changes made
in law during the pendency of the appeal, the parties are directed to bear
their own costs throughout.
K.K. Mathew, J.
255. In the election petition filed by the respondent in civil Appeal No. 887
of 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 'respondent) seven charges of corrupt
practice were made against the appellant therein (hereinafter called the
'appellant"). and it was prayed that the election of the appellant be set
aside. The learned Judge who tried the petition found that two of the
charges had been made out but that the rest of the charges were not
substantiated. He set aside the election of the appellant with the result that
the appellant incurred the disqualification for a period of six years as
visualized in Section 8-A of the Representation of the People Act. 1951. It is
against this judgment that civil Appeal No. 887 of 1975 has been filed.
256. The respondent has filed a cross appeal (Civil Appeal No. 909 of 1975)
challenging the findings of the High Court in respect of the other charges of
corrupt practice.
257. During the pendency of these appeals, the Parliament passed the
Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 on 6-8-1975 by which certain
amendments were made in the provisions of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, and the Indian Penal Code.
258. On 10-8-1975 the Parliament in the exercise of its constituent power
passed the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975 (hereinafter
referred to as the 'Amendment'). By the Amendment, Article 71 of the
Constitution was substituted by a new Article and that Article provided by
Clause (1) that, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament
may, by law, regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election
of a President or Vice-President, including the grounds on which such
election may be questioned. By Clause (2) of the Article it was provided that
all doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a
President or Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by such
authority or body in such manner as may be provided for by or under any
law referred to in Clause (1). Clause (3) stated that the validity of any such
law referred to in Clause (1) and the decision of any authority or body under
such law shall not be called in question in any court
259. By Clause 4 of the amended Article 329-A was inserted reading as
follows:
329-A. Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of
Prime Minister and Speaker:
(1) subject to the provisions of Chapter II of Part V (except
Sub-clause (e) of Clause (1) of Article 102), no election
(a) to either House of Parliament of a person who
holds the office of the Prime Minister at the time of
such election or is appointed as Prime Minister
after such election;
(b) to the House of the People of a person who
holds the office of a Speaker of that House at the
time of such election or who is chosen as the
Speaker for that House after such election:
shall be called in question except before such
authority (not being any such authority as is
referred to in Clause (b) of Article 329) or body
and in such manner as may be provided for by or
under any law made by Parliament and any such
law may provide for all other matters relating to
doubts and disputes in relation to such election
including the grounds on which such election may
be questioned.
(2) The validity of any such law as is referred to in Clause
(1) and the decision of any authority or body under such
law shall not be called in question in any court.
(3) Where any person is appointed as Prime Minister or, as
the case may be, chosen to the office of the Speaker of the
House of the People, while an election petition referred to
in Clause (b) of Article 329 in respect of his election to
either House of Parliament or as the case may be, to the
House of the People is pending, such election petition shall
abate upon such person being appointed as Prime Minister
or, as the case may be being chosen to the office of the
Speaker of the House of the People, but such election may
be called in question under any such law as is referred to in
Clause (1).
(4) No law made by Parliament before the commencement
of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, in
so far as it relates to election petitions and matters
connected therewith shall apply or shall be deemed ever to
have applied to or in relation to the election of any such
person as is referred to in Clause (1) to either House of
Parliament and such election shall not be deemed to be
void or ever to have become void on any ground on which
such election could be declared to be void or has, before
such commencement, been declared to be void under any
such law and notwithstanding any order made by any
court, before such commencement, declaring such election
to be void, such election shall continue to be valid in all
respects and any such order and any finding on which such
order is based shall be and shall be deemed always to have
been void and of no effect.
(5) Any appeal or cross appeal against any such order of
any court as is referred to in Clause (4) pending
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act. 1975 before the Supreme
Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions
of Clause (4).
(6) The provisions of this Article shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution.
260. The respondent contended that Clause (4) of Article 329-A (hereinafter
referred to as 'Clause (4)') is invalid for the reason that some of the basic
structures of the Constitution have been damaged by its enactment.
261. The argument was that although the amending body could declare that
the election of the appellant shall not be deemed to be void and the
judgment of the High Court to be void on the basis that no law relating to
election petition and matters connected therewith would apply to the
election, yet the amending body could not have held the election to be valid
as it did not ascertain the facts relating to the election and apply the
relevant law to them. Counsel submitted that by its very nature, an election
dispute in a democratic system of Government raises questions which can
be decided only by the exercise of judicial power, that by retrospectively
rendering the forum for investigation into the complaints regarding the
validity of the election of the appellant coram non judice, and by the
amending body judging its validity without ascertaining the facts and
applying the relevant law, the Amendment has fundamentally damaged an
essential feature of the democratic structure of the Constitution, namely,
free and fair election.
262. Counsel also submitted that equality and rule of law are essential
features of democracy; that Clause (4) by dispensing with the application of
the law relating to election petition and matters connected therewith to the
appellant, made an unreasonable classification among persons. similarly
situated with reference to the purpose of the law.
263. The further submission was that separation of powers is a basic
structure of the Constitution and that if it be supposed that the amending
body ascertained the facts regarding the election of the appellant and
applied the relevant law, the exercise of that power by the amending body
would offend the doctrine of separation of powers and that, at any rate, this
process would not result in an amendment of the Constitution by enacting a
law, but only in the passing of a judgment or sentence which can never be
characterized as a law, let alone a law relating to the Constitution of India.
264. In His Holiness Kesavanada Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 (hereinafter referred to as
'Bharati's case'), a majority of seven Judges held that the power conferred
under Article 368 of the Constitution was not absolute. They took the view
that by an amendment, the basic structure of the Constitution cannot be
damaged or destroyed. And, as to what are the basic structures of the
Constitution, illustrations have been given by each of these Judges. They
include supremacy of the Constitution democratic republication form of
Government, secular character of the Constitution, separation of powers
among the legislature, executive and judiciary, the federal character of the
Constitution, Rule of Law, equality of status and of opportunity; justice,
social, economic and political; unity and integrity of the nation and the
dignity of the individual secured by the various provisions of the
Constitution. There was consensus among these Judges that democracy is a
basic structure of the Constitution. I proceed on the assumption that the law
as laid down by the majority in that case should govern the decision here,
although 1 did not share the view of the majority.
265. therefore, if by Clause (4), any essential features of the democratic
republication structure of our polity as visualized by the Constitution has
been damaged or destroyed, the clause would be ultra vires the
Constitution.
266. One way of looking at the first part of Clause (4) is that the amending
body has, with retrospective effect, repealed the law relating to election
petition in respect of the persons specified in Clause (1) and hence the
judgment rendered on the basis of the previous law relating to election
petition became automatically void, and the amending body was merely
stating the consequence of the retrospective repeal of the law and therefore
the declaration that the judgment was void was not an exercise of judicial
function. On the other hand, it might be possible to view the first part of
Clause (4) as an exercise of judicial power for the reason that, even
assuming that by virtue of the retrospective repeal of the law relating to
election petition, there was no jurisdiction in the High Court to entertain or
try the election petition and pass the judgment, a repeal simpliciter did not
render the judgment ipso facto void and, therefore, in making the
declaration that the judgment was void, the amending body was performing
a function which has traditionally been in the province of court.
267. Be that as it may, I feel no doubt that the amending body, when it
declared the election of the appellant to be valid, had to ascertain the
adjudicative facts "Adjudicative facts are facts about the parties or their
activities, business and properties usually answering the question of who did
what, where when, how, why, with what motive or intent; adjudicative facts
are roughly the kind of facts that go to a jury in a jury case. Legislative facts
do not usually concern the immediate parties but are general facts which
help the tribunal decide questions of law, policy and discretion.
"Facts pertaining to the parties and their activities that is, adjudicative facts,
are intrinsically the kind of the facts that ordinarily ought not to be
determined without giving the parties a chance to know and to meet any
evidence that may be unfavourable to them, that is, without providing the
parties an opportunity for trial." (see K.C. Davis : "The Requirement of a
Trial-type Hearing" 70 H L R. 193) and apply the relevant norm for
adjudging its validity. If, however, the amending body did not ascertain the
facts relating to the election and apply the relevant norm, the declaration of
the validity of the election was a flat of a sui generis character of the
amending body.
268. The concept of democracy as visualized by the Constitution
presupposes the representation of the people in Parliament and State
Legislatures by the method of election. And, before an election machinery
can be brought into operation, there are three requisites which require to be
attended to, namely, (1) there should be a set of laws and rules making
provisions with respect to all matters relating to or in connection with,
elections, and it should be decided as to how these laws and rules are to be
made; (2) there should be an executive charged with the duty of securing
the due conduct of elections; and (3) there should be a judicial tribunal to
deal with disputes arising out of or in connection with elections. Articles 327
and 328 deal with the first of these requisites, Article 324 with the second
and Article 329 with the third requisite (see N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning
Officer, Namakkal Constituency MANU/SC/0049/1952 : [1952]1SCR218 .
269. Article 329(b) envisages the challenge to an election by a petition to be
presented to such authority as the Parliament may, by law prescribe. A law
relating to election should contain the requisite qualification for candidates,
the method of voting, definition of corrupt practices by the candidates and
their election agents, the forum for adjudication of election disputes and
other cognate matters. It is on the basis of this law that the question
whether there has been a valid election has to be determined by the
authority to which the petition is presented. And, when a dispute is raised as
regards the validity of the election of a particular candidate the authority
entrusted with the task of resolving the dispute must necessarily exercise a
judicial function, for the process consists of ascertaining the facts relating to
the election and applying the law to the facts so ascertained. In other
words, it is obvious that a power must be lodged somewhere to judge the
validity of the election, for, otherwise, there would be no certainty as to who
were legitimately chosen as members, and any intruder or usurper might
claim a seat and thus trample upon the privileges and liberties of the
people. Indeed, elections would become under such circumstances, a
mockery. In whichever authority the power is lodged, the nature of the
function is such that it requires a judicial approach. It cannot be resolved on
considerations of political expediency.
270. It was contended for the appellant that, in England, it was the House of
Common s which originally decided election disputes concerning its
members, that it was only in 1770 that the function was delegated to
committees and, therefore, Parliament is the proper forum for deciding
election disputes of its members as it is one of its privileges. I think, at the
time our Constitution was framed, the decision of an election dispute had
ceased to be a privilege of the House of Commons in England and therefore,
under Article 105(3), it could not be a privilege of Parliament in this country.
271. Before the year 1770, controverted elections were tried and
determined by the whole House of Commons as mere party questions upon
which the strength of contending factions might be tested "In order to
prevent so notorious a perversion of justice, the House consented to submit
the exercise of its privilege to a tribunal constituted by law, which, though
composed of its own members, should be appointed so as to secure
impartiality and the administration of justice according to the laws of the
land under the sanction of oaths". The principle of the Grenvile Act, and of
others which were passed at different times since 1770, was the selection
by lot of committees for the trial of election petitions. And, at present, by
Part III of the Representation of the People Act, 1949, the trial of
controverted elections is confided to Judges selected from the judiciary in
the appropriate part of the United Kingdom. Provision is made in each case
for constitution a rota from whom these Judges are selected. The House has
no cognizance of these proceedings until their determination, when the
Judges certify their determination. The Judges are to make a report in any
case where a charge has been made in the petition of corrupt and illegal
practice having been committed at an election; and they may also make a
special report on any matter arising which they think should be submitted to
the House. See Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 18th edition (1971), pp. 29-31. 272. Article 1, Section 5(1) of the Constitution of the United States of
America provides that each House shall be the Judge of the elections,
returns and qualifications of its own members.
273. In whichever body or authority, the jurisdiction is vested, the exercise
of the jurisdiction must be judicial in character. This Court has held that in
adjudicating an election dispute an authority is performing a judicial function
and a petition for leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution would
lie to this Court against the decision notwithstanding the provisions of Article
329(b) (see Durga Shankar Mehta v. Thakur Rathuraj Singh
MANU/SC/0099/1954 : [1955]1SCR267 .
274. In Barry v. Unites States Ex. Rel. Cunningham (1928) 73 LawEd 867, it
was held that in exercising the power to judge of the election returns and
qualifications of members, the senate acts as a judicial tribunal.
275. It might be that if the adjudication of election disputes in respect of its
members had been vested in each of the Houses of Parliament by the
Constitution, the decision of the House would have been final. That would
have been on the basis of the doctrine of the political question, namely, that
the function has been exclusively committed textually to another agency, I
am aware that the doctrine of political question has no hospitable quarter in
this Court since the decision in Madhav Rao Scindia v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0050/1970 : [1971]3SCR9 . But I venture to think that the
doctrine alone can explain why the courts abstain from interfering with a
verdict on an impeachment of the President for violation of the Constitution,
a function essentially judicial. See Wechsler : Toward Neutral Principles of
Constitutional Law, 73 H L R 1
276. An election dispute has a public aspect in that it is concerned more
with the right of a. constituency to be represented by a particular candidate.
But it does not follow from the public character of the controversy that there
is no list between the parties to the election contest, and that the lis can be
resolved otherwise than by ascertaining the facts relating to the election,
and applying the relevant law:
A judicial inquiry investigates, declares and enforces liabilities as
they stand on present or past facts and under laws supposed
already to exist. This is its purpose and end. Legislation, on the
other hand, looks to the future and changes existing conditions by
making a new rule, to be applied thereafter to all or some part of
some subject to its power. Justice Holmes in Pretis v. Atlantic Coast Line Co. (1908) 211 US 210. 277. The Privy Council had occasion to consider this question in United
Engineering Workers' Union v. Devanayagam 1968 AC 356. The judgment of
the majority was delivered by Lord Dilhorne, Lord Guest and Lord Devlin
dissented. The question in the case was whether the President of a labour
tribunal in Ceylon was the holder of a judicial office. If so, as the man in
question had not been appointed in the way the Constitution of Ceylon
required for appointments of judicial officers, whether the tribunal was
without jurisdiction. It is clear from the judgment of their Lordships of the
minority that judicial power is the exercise of a power on the basis of pre-
existing law. At pp. 384-385, their Loreships said:
Another characteristic of the judicial power is that it is concerned
with existing rights, that is, those which the parties actually have at
the inception of the suit and not those which it may be thought they
ought to have; it is concerned with the past and the present and
not with the future.
278. Accor ding to the historic analysis, the essence of the distinction
between legislative power and judicial power is that the legislature makes
new law which becomes binding on all persons over whom the legislature
exercises legislative power; the judicature applies already existing law in the
resolution of disputes between particular parties and Judges may not
deviate from this duty. This view of the distinction between the obligation to
apply and enforce rules and a discretion to modify rules or make new rules
was at one time applied uncompromisingly in describing functions as
legislative or judicial. Thus, De Lolme said that courts of equity as then
existing in England had a legislative function. They are, he said, a kind of
inferior experimental legislature, continually employed in finding out and
providing law remedies for those new species of cases for which neither the
courts of common  law, nor the legislature have as yet found it convenient or
practicable to establish any. See the Constitution of England, New Ed.
(1800) p. 149. Though this would show that neither for logic nor in language
has the boundary between legislation and adjudication ever been rigidly and
clearly drawn, the distinction between the two is well established.
279. If, therefore, the decision of the amending body that the election of the
appellant was valid was the result of the exercise of judicial power or of
despotic discretion governed society by considerations of political
expediency, the question is whether that decision, though couched in the
form of an enactment, can be characterized as an amendment of the
Constitution.
280. The constituent power is the power to frame a Constitution. The people
of India, in the exercise of that power, framed the Constitution and it enacts
the basic norms. By that instrument, the people conferred on the amending
body the power to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of its
provisions (Article 368). It is not necessary to go in detail into the question
whether the power to amend is coextensive which the constituent power of
the people to frame a Constitution. In Bharaii's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 : under the Indian Constitution, the original sovereign-the people-
created, by the amending clause of the Constitution, a lesser
sovereign, almost coextensive in power with itself. This sovereign,
the one established by the revolutionary act of the full or complete
sovereign has been called by Max Radin,
the "pro-sovereign", the holder of the amending power under the
Constitution.
281. I fully appreciate that 'sovereign', if conceived of as an omnipotent
being, has no existence in the real world. Several thoughtful writers have
deprecated the use of the expression in legal discussion as it has theological
and religious overtones. Neverthelss, as the practice has become inveterate
it will only create confusion if any departure is made in this case from the
practice. If it is made clear that sovereign is not a 'mortal God' and can
express himself or itself only in the manner and form prescribed by law and
can be sovereign only when he or it acts in a certain way also prescribed by
law, then perhaps the use of the expression will have no harmful
consequence.
282. " 'Legal sovereignty' is a capacity 'to determine the actions of persons
in certain intended ways by means of a law....were the actions of those who
exercise the authority, in those respects in which they do exercise it, are not
subject to any exercise by other persons of the kind of authority which they
are exercising.' "See W.J. Rees : "The Theory of Sovereignty Re-stated" in
Mind. Vol. iix (1950) quoted 68 of 'In Defense of Sovereignty', ed. W.J.
Stankiewicz.
283. The point to be kept in mind is that the amending body which exercises
the constituent power of the legal sovereign, though limited by virtue of the
decision in Bharati's case, MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 can
express itself only by making laws.
284. The distinction between Constitutional law and ordinary law in a rigid
Constitution like ours is that the validity of the Constitutional law cannot be
challenged whereas that of ordinary law can be challenged on the
touchstone of Constitution. But Constitutional law is as much law as ordinary
law. A Constitution cannot consist of a string of isolated dooms. A judgment
or sentence which is the result of the exercise of judicial power or of
despotic discretion is not a law as it has not got the generality which is an
essential characteristic of law. A despotic decision without ascertaining the
facts of a case and applying the law to them, though dressed in the garb of
law, is like a bill of attainder. It is a legislative judgment.
285. According to Blackstone, a law and a particular command are
distinguished in the following manner : a law obliges generally the members
of a given community, or a law obliges generally persons of a given class. A
particular command obliges a single person or persons, whom it determines
individually. Most of the laws established by political superiors are,
therefore, general in a twofold manner : as enjoining or forbidding generally
acts of kinds or sorts; and as binding the whole community, or, at least
whole classes of its members. He then said : See Blackstone :
Commentaries Vol. i, p. 44.
" therefore, a particular act of the legislature to confiscate the
goods of Titus," or to attaint him of high treason, does not enter
into the idea of a municipal law : for the operation of this act is
spent upon Titus only and has no relation to the community in
general : it is rather a sentence than a law.
This passage was cited with approval by the Privy Council in Liyanage v. The
Queen (1967) 1 AC 259 at p. 291 to show that the end product of the
exercise of judicial power is a judgment or sentence and not a law.
286. St. Thomas Aquinas (after considering the views of Aristotle, St.
Augustine and the opinions of jurists in pandects) has said that since the
end of law is common  good the law should be framed not for private benefit
but for the common  good of all citizens, see "The Treatise on Law" Gateway Ed (1970) p. 87. 287. Rousseau wrote : Contract Social, Bk II, Chap. VI.
When I say that the object of laws is always general. I mean that
the law considers subjects collectively and actions as abstract;
never a man as an individual, nor an action as particular neither is
what the sovereign himself orders about a particular object a law
but a decree; not an act of sovereignty, but of magistracy.
288. Austin draws an explicit distinction between 'laws' and 'particular
commands'. Where a command, he says, obliges generally to acts or
forbearances of a class, a command is a law of rule. But where it obliges to
a specific act or forbearance, a command is occasional or particular. See
Austin's Jurisprudence, 2nd Ed. Vol. I, p. 18.
289. Kelsen, after noting the distinction made by Austin has observed:
We can of course recognize as law only general norms. But there is
no doubt that law does not consist of general norms only. Law
includes individual norms, i.e. , norms which determine the
behavior of one individual in one non-recurring situation and which
therefore are valid only for one particular case and may be obeyed
or applied only once.
Accor ding to him, such norms are valid law because they are parts of the
legal order as a whole in exactly the same sense as those general norms on
the basis of which they have' been created, he said that particular norms
are the decisions of courts as far as their binding force is limited to the
particular case at hand and that a Judge who orders a debtor A to return $
1000 to his creditor B was passing a law : Kelsen : General Theory of Law and State, 1961, p. 38. 290. It may be noted that Kelsen made no distinction between law-creation
and law-application. Accor ding to him, every act of applying the law involved
the creation of norms. In his view, there was no distinction between creation
and application of law, a view I find difficult to accept in the light of clear
distinction made by the decisions of this Court between legislative and
judicial functions.
291. A statute is a general rule. A resolution by the legislature that a town
shall pay one hundred dollars to Timothy Coggan is not a statute, John
Chipman Gray : Nature and Source of Law, p. 161.
292. The mere fact that an Act to indemnify A or an Act sanctioning a
pension to the Speaker is passed by the House of Commons in England
should not lead us to conclude that it is law. "The English Legislature was
originally constituted not for legislative, but for financial purposes. Its
primary function was, not to make laws, but to grant supplies. "Courtnancy
Ilbert, Legislative Methods and Forms, (Oxford 1901), p. 208.
293. J. C. Carter has said that statute books contain vast masses of matter
which, though in the form of laws, are not laws in the proper sense, that
these consist in the making of provisions for the maintenance of public
works of the State, for the building of asylums, hospitals, school buses, and
a great variety of similar matters, and that this is but the record of actions
of the State in relation to the business in which it is engaged. According to
him, the State is a great public corporation which conducts a vast mass of
business, and the written provisions for this, though in the form of laws are
not essentially different from the minutes of ordinary corporate bodies
recording their actions. Law, Its Origin, Growth and Function (New York and London, 1907), p. 116. 294. Walter Bagehot has said:
An immense mass, indeed of the legislation is not, in the proper
language of jurisprudence legislation at all. A law is a general
command applicable to many cases. The 'special acts' which crowd
the statute book and weary parliamentary committees are
applicable to one case only. They do not lay down rules according to
which railways shall be made, but enact that such and such a rail
way shall be made from this place to that place, and they have no
bearing on any other transaction. "The English Constitution "
(1967), World's Classics Edition (Oxford 1928), p. 119.
295. "When the authors of books on jurisprudence write about law, when
professional lawyers talk about law, the kind of law about which they are
mainly thinking is that which is found in Justinian's Institutes, or in the
Nepoleonic Codes, or in the New civil Code of the German Empire, that is to
say, the legal rules which relate to contracts and torts, to property, to family
relations and inheritance, or else to law of crimes as is to be found in a
Penal Code." see Courtnancy Ilbert. Legislative Methods and Forms, (Oxford, 1901), p. 209. 296. John Locke was of the view that 'legislative authority is to act in a
particular way...(and) those who wield this authority should make only
general rules. They are to govern by promulgated established laws not to be
varied in particular cases.' see the passage quoted at p. 129 of Hayek : Law.
Legislation and Liberty.
297. Perhaps the most exhaustive treatment of the question of the necessity
for generality in law is to be found in "Jurisprudence, Men and Ideas of the
Law" by Patterson (see Chapter V). According to him, the generality of a law
depends upon its being applicable to an indefinite number of human beings
and that is the most significant aspect of law. He said that an ordinary
judgment of a court is not law as a judgment applies only to a limited
number of individuals, the parties to the case. He disagreed with Dr.
Kelsen's statement that the judicial decision is an individual legal norm' as
the expression 'individual' legal norm is a self contradiction.
298. To Friedmann the most essential element in the concept of law is a
degree of generality:
The first desideratum of a system for subjecting human conduct to
the governance of rules is an obvious one : there must be rules.
This may be stated as a requirement of generality. Here as in so
many other fields, John Austin's distinction was basically right, but
too rigidly drawn.
Friedmann was of the view that a community which had no general
prescription at all but only an infinite multitude of individual commands,
would not be regarded as having a legal order. It would dissolve into millions
of individual relationships.
Friedmann : "Legal Theory" 5th Ed., pp. 15-16. See also : Lon L. Fuller :
"The Morality of Law" Pp. 46-49.
299. For the purpose of this case I accept as correct the statement of
Blackstone already quoted and approved by the Privy Council in Liyanage v.
The Queen (1967) 1 AC 259. I cannot regard the resolution of an election
dispute by the amending body as law : It is either a judicial sentence or a
legislative judgment like a Bill of Attainder.
300. It is no doubt true that the House of Commons in England used to pass
bills of attainder. But the practice has fallen into desuetude, since the year
1696. A bill of attainder is a special act of the legislature, as inflicts capital
punishments upon persons supposed to be guilty of high offences, such as
treason and felony, without any conviction in the ordinary course of judicial
proceedings. The legislature assumes judicial magistracy, pronouncing upon
the guilt of the party without any of the common forms and guards of trial,
and satisfying itself with proofs, when such proofs are within its reach,
whether they are conformable to the rules of evidence or not. In short, in all
such cases, the legislature exercises the highest power of sovereignty, and
what may be properly deemed an irresponsible despotic discretion, being
governed solely by what it deems political necessity or expediency, and too
often under the influence of unreasonable fears, or unfounded suspicions.
see 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States (Boston, 1833), Section 1338. 301. In U.S. v. Brown, 381 US 437 the Supreme Court of United States of
America stated that the main reason why the power to pass bill of attainder
was taken away from the Congress was:
Everyone must concede that a legislative body, from its numbers
and organisation, and from the very intimate dependence of its
members upon the people, which renders them liable to be
peculiarly susceptible to popular clamour is not properly constituted
to try with coolness, caution, and impartiality a criminal charge,
especially in those cases in which the popular feeling is strongly
excited-the very class of cases most likely to be prosecuted by this
mode." see Cooky, Constitutional Limitations, pp. 536-537, 8th Ed.
(1927).
Macauley's account of the attainder of Sir John Fenwick in 1696, the last in
the History of the House of Commons, is particularly vivid :
Some hundreds of gentlemen, every one of whom had much more
than half made up his mind before the case was open, performed
the office both of Judge and jury. They were not restrained, as a
Judge is restrained by the sense of, responsibility They were not
selected, as a jury is selected, in a manner which enables a culprit
to exclude his personal and political enemies. The arbiters of the
prisoner's fate came in and went out as they chose. They heard a
fragment here and there of what was said against him, and a
fragment here and there of what was said in his favour. During the
progress of the bill they were exposed to every species of influence.
One member might be threatened by the electors of his borough
with the loss of his seat In the debates arts were practised and
passions excited which are unknown to well constituted tribunals,
but from which no great popular assembly divided into parties ever
was or ever will be free.
(IX Macaulay, History of England, p. 207 (1900)).
Much the same reason will apply to the resolution of an election dispute by
an amending body as it consists in all democratic countries, of an assembly
of persons like Parliament.
302. In Liyanage v. The Queen (1967) 1 AC 259 the appellants had been
charged with offences arising out of an abortive coup d'etat on January 27,
1962. The story of the coup d'etat was set out in a White Paper issued by
the Ceylon Government. On March 16, 1972 the Criminal Law (Special
Provisions) Act was passed and it was given retrospective effect from
January 1, 1962. The Act was limited in operation to those who were
accused to offences against the State in or about January 27, 1962. The Act
legalised the imprisonment of the appellants while they were awaiting trial
and modified a section of the Penal Code so as to enact ex post facto a new
offence to meet the circumstances of the abortive coup. The Act empowered
the Minister of Justice to nominate the three Judges to try the appellants
without a jury. The validity of the Act was challenged as well as the
nomination which had been made by the Minister of Justice of the three
Judges. The Ceylon Supreme Court upheld the objection about the vires of
some of the provisions of the Act as well as the nomination of the Judges.
Subsequently the Act was amended and the power of nomination of the
Judges was conferred on the Chief Justice. The appellants having been
convicted at the trial before a Court of three Judges nominated under the
amended Act, went up in appeal before the Judicial Committee. It was
contended that the Acts of 1962 offended against the Constitution in that
they amounted to a direction to convict the appellants or to a legislative
plan to secure the conviction and severe punishment of the appellants and
thus constituted an unjustifiable assumption of judicial power by the
legislature, or an interference with judicial power which was outside the
legislature's competence.
303. The Privy Council said in the course of their judgment that the pith and
substance of the law enactments was a legislative plan ex post facto to
secure the conviction, that although legislation ad hominem which is
directed to the course of particular proceedings may not always amount to
an interference with the functions of the judiciary, but in the present case
they had no doubt that there was such interference : that it was not only
the likely but the intended effect of the impugned enactments and that it
was fatal to their validity. They further said that the true nature and purpose
of these enactments were revealed by their conjoint impact on the specific
proceedings in respect of which they were designed and they took their
colour, in particular from the alterations they purported to make as to their
ultimate objective -the punishment of those convicted-and that these
alterations constituted a grave and deliberate incursion into the judicial
sphere and then they quoted with approval the observations of Blackstone
already referred to : See Blackstone : Commentaries, Vol. I, p. 44. These
observations have great relevance to the cease in hand. True it is that their
Lordships did not decide the question whether by a Constitutional
amendment the result could have been achieved or not.
304. At the time when the Amendment was passed, the appeal filed by the
appellant and the cross appeal of the respondent were pending before the
Supreme Court. Clause (4) was legislation ad hominem directed against the
course of the hearing of the appeals on merits as the appeal and the cross
appeal were to be disposed of in accordance with that clause and not by
applying the law to the facts as ascertained by the Court. This was a direct
interference with the decision of these appeals by the Supreme Court on
their merits by a legislative judgment.
305. If the amending body really exercised judicial power, that power was
exercised in violation of the principles of natural justice of audi alteram
partem. Even if a power is given to a body without specifying that the rules
of natural justice should be observed in exercising it, the nature of the
power would call for its observance.
306. The Solicitor General contended that the amending body, in declaring
that the election was valid, was exercising its constituent legislative power;
that legislative power does not adjudicate but only creates validity, even
retrospectively, by enacting a law with the effect; that validation is law-
making; that it alters the legal position by making new law and that
validation may take place before or after a judgment. He said that by the
repeal of the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the
amending body had wiped out not only the election petition but also the
judgment of the High Court and has deprived the respondent of the right to
raise any dispute as regards the validity of the election of the appellant and,
therefore, there was no dispute to be adjudicated upon by the amending
body. He also said-I think, in the alternative-that although the law relating
to election petitions and other matters connected therewith was dispensed
with in respect of the appellant, the amending body had the ideal norms of
fair and free election in its view for adjudging the validity of the election. He
submitted that it was open to the amending body to gather facts from any
source and as the facts collected by the High Court were there factually the
amending body looked into them and applied the ideal norms of election for
adjudging its validity.
307. It is difficult to understand, when the amending body expressly
excluded the operation of all laws relating to election petition and matters
connected therewith by the first part of Clause (4), what ideal norms of free
and fair election it had in view in adjudging the validity of the election of the
appellant. I cannot conceive of any pre-existing ideal norms of election apart
from the law enacted by the appropriate legislatures. If the amending body
evolved new norms for adjudging the validity of the particular election, it
was the exercise of a despotic power and that would damage the democratic
structure of the Constitution.
308. Quite apart from it, there is nothing on the face of the amendment to
show that the amending body ascertained the facts of the case or applied
any norms for determining the validity of the election. I do not think that
under Article 368 the amending body was competent to pass an ordinary
law with retrospective effect to validate the election. It can only amend the
Constitution by passing a law of the rank of which the Constitution is made
of.
309. There is also nothing to show that the amending body validated the
election with reference to any change of the law which formed the
foundation of the judgment. The cases cited by the Solicitor General to show
that a competent legislature has power to validate an invalid election do not
indicate that there can be a validation without changing the law which
invalidated the election. Nor do I think that a contested election can be
validated without an authority applying the new law to the facts as
ascertained by judicial process. If the Court which ascertained the facts and
applied the law was rendered coram non judice, the facts ascertained by it
have ceased to be facts. There are no absolute or immediately evident facts.
Only by being first ascertained through legal procedure are facts brought
into the sphere of law or, we may say, though it may sound paradoxical, that
the competent organ legally creates facts. The Courts perform a constitutive
function in ascertaining facts. There is no fact 'in itself that A has killed B.
There is only somebody's belief or knowledge. They are all private opinion
without relevance. Only establishment by a competent organ has legal
relevance. See Kelsen : General Theory of Law and State, p. 136. And, when
that organ was rendered coram non judice, and its judgment declared void,
the facts created by it perished. They ceased to be facts. Adjudicative facts
of an election dispute cannot be gathered by legislative process behind the
back of the parties; they can be gathered only by judicial process. The
amending body did not ascertain the facts by resorting to judicial process.
310. If Clause (4) was an exercise in legislative validation without changing
the law which made the election invalid, when there ought to have been an
exercise of judicial power of ascertaining the adjudicative facts and applying
the law, the clause would damage the democratic structure of the
Constitution, as the Constitution visualizes the resolution of an election
dispute by a petition presented to an authority exercising judicial power. The
contention that there was no election dispute as Clause (4) by repealing the
law relating to election petition had rendered the petition filed by the
respondent nonest, if allowed, will toll the death knell of the democratic
structure of the Constitution. If Article 329(b) envisages the resolution of an
election dispute by judicial process by a petition presented to an authority
as the appropriate legislature may by law provide, a Constitutional
amendment cannot dispense with that requirement without damaging an
essential feature of democracy, viz., the mechanism for determining the real
representative of the people in an election as contemplated by the
Constitution.
311. All the cases cited by the Solicitor General pertain either to legislative
validation of a void election by applying a new law to undisputed facts or to
the removal of an admitted disqualification by a law with retrospective
effect.
312. In Abeyesekera v. Jayatilake 1932 AC 260, the facts were : An order in
council of 1923 made provision as to the Legislative Council in Cevlon, but
reserved to His Mamesty power to revoke, alter or amend the order. The
appellant, as common  informer bought an action to recover penalties under
the order from the respondent, who he alleged had sat and voted after his
(sic) had become vacant under its provisions by reason of his having a
pecuniary interest in a contract with the Government. In 1923, after the
action had been brought but before its trial, an amending order in Council
was made which provided : "if any such action or legal proceeding has been
or shall be insituted, it shall be dismissed and made void, subject to such
order as to costs as the Court may think fit to make." It also amended the
Order of 1923 so as to except the office held by the respondent from its
operation. The Privy Council held that the Order of 1928 was valid, having
regard to the power reserved by the Order of 1923, and was an effective
defence to the action, although it was retrospective in its operation and that
this was no exercise of judicial power. The direction to dismiss must be
understood in the light of an earlier provision in the same Order in Council
which amended the law on which the proceeding was founded, the dismissal
was thus the result of the change in the law and all that the later clause
showed was that the change was to have retrospective effect and govern
the rights of parties even in pending proceedings. The decision would be
helpful here only if and in so far as the provision in Clause (4) had followed
from a change in any rule of law.
313. The decision in Piare Dusadh v. King Emperor MANU/FE/0011/1943
concerned the validation of a sentence imposed by a special Criminal Court
which was held to have no jurisdiction to try the case by an order of a
Court. By a validation Act, the jurisdiction was conferred with retrospective
effect on the special Criminal Court and the sentence imposed by it was
made lawful. It was held that there was no exercise of any judicial power by
the legislating authority.
314. In Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana MANU/SC/0275/1969 :
[1970]2SCR835 , the appellant, a Government advocate stood for election
to the State Legislative Assembly of Rajasthan and was declared elect ed.
The election was challenged and the ground of challenge was that the
appellant held an office of profit within the meaning of Article 191 of the
Constitution. The High Court set aside the election for that reason. While the
appeal was pending in this Court, Rajasthan Act 5 of 1969 was passed
declaring among others that the holder of the office of a Special
Government Pleader was not disqualified from being chosen or for being a
member of the State Legislative Assembly : and, by Section 2(2), the Act
was made retrospective removing the appellant's disqualification
retrospectively. It was held that Act 5 of 1969 had removed the
disqualification retrospectively, that Parliament and the State legislatures
can legislate retrospectively subject to the provisions of the Constitution,
that no limitation on the powers of the legislature, to make a declaration
validating an election could be put, and that, by enacting the impugned Act,
the disqualification if any which existed in the 1951 Act had been removed.
315. In State of Orissa v. Bhupendra Kumar Bose MANU/SC/0220/1961 :
AIR1962SC945 , the facts were as follows : Elections were held for the
Cuttack Municipality and 27 persons were declared elected as Councillors.
One B, who was defeated at the elections, filed a writ, petition before the
High Court challenging the elections. The High Court held that the electoral
rolls had not been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Orissa
Municipalities Act, 1950, as the age qualification had been published too late
thereby curtailing the period of claims and objections to the preliminary roll
to 2 days from 21 days as prescribed; consequently, the High Court set
aside the elections. The State took the view that the judgment affected not
merely the Cuttack Municipality but other municipalities also. Accordingly,
the Governor promulgated an ordinance validating the elections to the
Cuttack municipality and validating the electoral rolls prepared in respect of
other municipalities. Thereupon, B filed a writ petition before the High Court
contending that the Ordinance was unconstitutional. The High Court found
that the Ordinance contravened Article 14 of the Constitution, that it did not
successfully cure the invalidity and that it offended Article 254(1) of the
Constitution as it was inconsistent with many Central Acts falling in the
concurrent list and was unconstitutional. The State and the councillors
appealed and challenged the findings of the High Court.
316. This Court held that Section 3(1) of the Ordinance effectively removed
the defects in the electoral rolls found by the High Court by its judgment
and that it successfully cured the invalidity of the electoral roll and of the
elections to the Cuttack Municipality.
317. The Solicitor General also cited other decisions to show that a
legislature can validate proceedings rendered invalid by judgment of Court.
As I said, they all involved substitution of new law with retrospective effect
for the old one and the basic facts were all taken to have been admitted or
not controverted. If the facts are not admitted, the legislature cannot
determine them except by employing judicial process. Besdies, those cases
being cases of legislative validation, need not pass the test of the theory of
basic structure which, I think, will apply only to Constitutional amendment.
318. Counsel for the appellant also brought to the notice of the Court
certain election validation Acts passed by the House of Commons in
England. These Acts removed with retrospective effect disqualifications of
members of parliament. In none of these cases was an election which was
being contested validated by parliament. Nor can these instances of
legislative removal of disqualification furnish any assistance to this Court for
the reason that in England there is no theory of basic structure operating as
a fetter on the power of parliament.
319. It was argued for the respondent that if the amending body exercised
judicial power and held the election of the appellant valid, its act was
unconstitutional also on the ground it damaged another basic structure of
the Constitution, namely, the doctrine of separation of powers.
320. The major problem of human society is to combine that degree of
liberty without which law is tyranny with that degree of law without which
liberty becomes licence; and, the difficulty has been to discover the practical
means of achieving this grand objective and to find the opportunity for
applying these means in the ever-shifting tangle of human affairs. A large
part of the effort of man over centuries has been expended in seeking a
solution of this great problem. A reign of law, in contrast to the tyranny of
power, can be achieved only through separating appropriately the several
powers of Government. If the lawmakers should also be the constant
administrators and dispensers of law and justice, then, the people would be
left without a remedy in case of injustice since no appeal can lie under the
fiat against such a supremacy. And, in this age-old search of political
philosophers for the secret of sound Government, combined with individual
liberty, it was Montesquieu who first saw the light. He was the first among
the political philosophers who saw the necessity of separating judicial power
from the executive and legislative branches of Government. Montesquieu
was the first to conceive of the three functions of Government as exercised
by three organs, each juxtaposed against others. He realised that the
efficient operation of Government involved a certain degree of overlapping
and that the theory of checks and balances required each organ to impede
too great an aggrandizement of authority by the other two powers. As
Holdsworth says, Montesquieu convinced the world that he had discovered a
new Constitutional principle which was universally valid. The doctrine of
separation of Governmental powers is not a mere theoretical, philosophical
concept. It is a practical, work-a-day principle. The division of Government
into three branches does not imply, as its critics would have us think, three
water-tight compartments. Thus, legislative impeachment of executive
officers of judges, executive veto over legislation, judicial review of
administrative or legislative actions are treated as partial exceptions which
need explanation. see generally : "The Doctrine of Separation of Powers and
its present day significance" by T. Vanderbilt.
321. There can be no liberty where the legislative and executive powers are
united in the same person or body of magistrates, or, if the power of judging
be not separated from the legislative and executive powers. Jefferson said :
All powers of Government-legislative, executive and judicial-result in the
legislative body. The concentration of these powers in the same hands is
precisely the definition of despotic Government. It will be no alleviation that
these powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands and not by a single
person. One hundred and seventy three despots would surely be as
oppressive as one. See Jefferson Works : 3 : 223 And, Montesquieu's own
words would show that where the whole power of one department is
exercised by the same hands which possess the whole power of another
department, the fundamental principles of a free Constitution are subverted.
In Federalist No. 47, James Madison suggests that Montesquieu's doctrine
did not mean that separate departments might have "no partial agency in or
no control over the acts of each other." His meaning was, according to
Madison, no more than that one department should not possess the whole
power of another.
322. The Judiciary, said the Federalist, is beyond comparison the weakest of
the three departments of power. It has no influence over either the sword or
the purse; no direction either of the strength or of the wealth of the society
and can take no active resolution whatever. It may truly be said to have
neither force nor will, but merely judgment. Of the three powers
Montesquieu said, the judiciary is in some measure next to nothing. If he
realised the relative weakness of the judiciary at the time he wrote, it is
evidence of his vision that he appreciated the supreme importance of its
independence. There is no liberty, he said, if the judicial power be not
separated from the legislative and executive.
323. But this doctrine which is directed against the concentration of these
powers in the same hand has no application as such when the question is
whether an amending body can exercise judicial power. In other words, the
doctrine is directed against the concentration of these sovereign powers in
one or other organ of Government. It was not designed to limit the power of
a constituent body.
324. Whereas in the United States of America and in Australia, the judicial
power is vested exclusively in Courts, there is no such exclusive vesting of
judicial power in the Supreme Court of India and the Courts subordinate to
it. And if the amending body exercised judicial power in adjudging the
validity of the election, it cannot be said that by that act, it has damaged a
basic structure of the Constitution embodied in the doctrine of separation of
powers. Even so, the question will remain whether it could exercise judicial
power without passing a law enabling it to do so. As I said, the exercise of
judicial power can result only in a judgment or sentence. The constituent
power, no doubt, is all embracing, comprising within its ambit the judicial,
executive and legislative powers. But if the constituent power is a power to
frame or amend a Constitution, it can be exercised only by making laws of a
particular kind.
325. The possession of power is distinct from its exercise. See Jacques
Maritain : "Man and State", pp. 101-102; also the judgment of Hidayatullah, J. in Golaknath v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762 The possession of legislative power by the amending body would not entitle
it to pass an ordinary law, unless the Constitution is first amended by
passing a Constitutional law authorizing it to do so. In the same way, the
possession of judicial power by the amending body would not warrant the
exercise of the power, unless a Constitutional law is passed by the amending
body enabling it to do so. Until that is done, its potential judicial power
would not become actual. Nobody can deny that by passing a law within its
competence, parliament can vest judicial power in any authority for deciding
a dispute or vest a part of that power in itself for resolving a controversy, as
there is no exclusive vesting of judicial power in Courts by the Constitution.
The doctrine of separation of powers which is directed against the
concentration of the whole or substantial part of the judicial power in the
legislature or the executive would not be a bar to the vesting of such a
power in itself. But, until a law is passed enabling it to do so, its potential
judicial power would not become actual.
326. Lord Coke objected to the exercise of judicial power by James I for
prgamatic reasons. Much of what Lord Coke said On Sunday morning,
November 10, 1607, there was a remarkable interview in Whitehall between
Sir Edward Coke, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and James I. We have
only Coke's account of the interview and not the King's, but there is no
reason to doubt its essential authenticity. The question between them was
whether the King, in his own person might take what causes he pleased
from the determination of the judges and determine them himself. This is
what Coke says, happened : "Then the King said that he thought the law
was founded upon reason and that he and others had reason as well as the
Judges : to which it was answered by me, that true it was that God had
endowed His Majesty with excellent science and great endowments of
nature, but His Majesty was not learned in the laws of his realm of England,
and causes which concern the life or inheritance, or goods, or fortunes of,
his subjects, are not to be decided by natural reason but by the artificial
reason and judgment of law, which law is an act which requires long study
and experience before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it; and
that the law was the golden metwand and measures to try the causes of the
subjects; and which protected His Majesty in safety and peace : with which
the King was greatly offended, and said, that then he should be under the
law, which was treason to affirm, as he said : to which I said that Bracton
saith, quod Rex non debet esse sub-homine set sub Deo et lege." It would
be hard to find a single paragraph in which more of the essence of English
Constitutional law and history could be found. The King ought not to be
under a man, non debetesses sub homine, but under God and the law, sed
sub Deo et lege. (See R.F.V. Heuston : Essays in Constitutional Law. second
edition, pp. 32-33). can be applied to parliament when it seeks to exercise
that power in its constituent capacity.
327. A sovereign in any system of civilized jurisprudence is not like an
oriental despot who can do anything he likes, in any manner he likes and at
any time he likes. That the Nizam of Hyderabad had legislative, judicial and
executive powers and could exercise any one of them by a firman has no
relevance when we are considering how a pro-sovereign-the holder of the
amending power-in a country governed by a Constitution should function.
Such a sovereign can express 'himself only by passing a particular kind of
law; and not through sporadic acts. 'He' cannot pick and choose cases
according to his whim and dispose them of by administering 'cadijustice' :
nor can the amending body, as already noticed, pass an ordinary law, as
Article 368 speaks of the constituent power of amending by way of addition,
variation or repeal, any provision of the Constitution in accordance with the
procedure laid down in that Article. An ordinary law can be passed by it only
after amending the provisions of the Constitution authorizing it to do so.
328. If the basic postulate that a sovereign can act only by enacting laws is
correct, then that is a limitation upon his power to do anything he likes. If I
may re-phrase the classical statement of Sir Owen Dixon : the law that a
sovereign can act only by law is supreme but as to what may be done by a
law so made, the sovereign is supreme over that law. See "Law and the
Constitution". 50 Law Quarterly Rev. 590, 604. Of course, this is subject to
the theory of basic structure. In other words, even though a sovereign can
act only by making law, the law he so makes may vest the authority to
exercise judicial power in himself; without such law he cannot exercise
judicial power.
329. The result of the discussion can be summed up as follows : Our
Constitution by Article 329(b) visualizes the resolution of an election dispute
on the basis of a petition presented to such authority and in such manner as
the appropriate legislautre may, by law, provide. The nature of the dispute
raised in an election petition is such that it cannot be resolved except by
judicial process, namely, by ascertaining the facts relating to the election
and applying the pre-existing law; when the amending body held that the
election of the appellant was valid, it could not have done so except by
ascertaining the facts by judicial process and by applying the law. The result
of this process would not be the enactment of Constitutional law but the
passing of a judgment or sentence.
The amending body, though possessed of judicial power, had no competence
to exercise it, unless it passed a Constitutional law enabling it to do so. If,
however, the decision of the amending body to hold the election of the
appellant valid was the result of the exercise of an 'irresponsible despotic
discretion' governed solely by what it deemed political necessity or
expediency, then, like a bill of attainder, it was a legislative judgment
disposing of a particular election dispute and not the enactment of a law
resulting in an amendment of the Constitution. And, even if the latter
process (the exercise of despotic discretion) could be regarded as an
amendment of the Constitution, the amendment would damage or destroy
an essential feature of democracy as established by the Constitution,
namely, the resolution of election dispute by an authority by the exercise of
judicial power by ascertaining the adjudicative facts and applying the
relevant law for determining the real representative of the people. The
decision of the amending body cannot be regarded as an exercise in
constituent legislative validation of an election for these reasons : firstly,
there can be no legislative validation of an election when there is dispute
between the parties as regards the adjudicative facts; the amending body
cannot gather these facts by employing legislative process; they can be
gathered only by judicial process.
Secondly, the amending body must change the law retrospectively so as to
make the election valid, if the election was rendered invalid by virtue of any
provision of the law actually existing at the time of election; Article 368 does
not confer on the amending body the competence to pass any ordinary law
whether with or without retrospective effect. Clause (4) expressly excluded
the operation of all laws relating to election petition to the election in
question. therefore, the election was held to be valid not by changing the
law which rendered it invalid. Thirdly, the cases cited for the appellant are
cases relating to legislative validation of invalid elections or removal of
disqualification with retrospective effect. Being cases of legislative
validation, or removal of disqualifications by legislature, they are not liable
to be tested on the basis of the theory of basic structure, which, I think, is
applicable only to Constitutional amendments. Fourthly, there was no
controversy in those cases with regard to adjudicative facts : if there was
controversy with regard to these facts, it is very doubtful whether there
could be legislative validation of an election by changing the law alone
without ascertaining the adjudicative facts by judicial process.
330. Then I come to the argument of counsel that equality is a basic
structure of the Constitution and that that has been damaged or destroyed
by Clause (4).
331. The Solicitor General submitted that the majority in Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 did not hold that Article 14 pertains
to the basic structure, that apart from Article 14, there is no principle of
equality which is a basic structure of the Constitution and that it is not a
chameleon like concept which changes its colour with the nature of the
subject-matter to which it is applied.
332. The majority in Bharati's case did not hold that Article 14 pertains to
the basic structure of the Constitution. The majority upheld the validity of
the first part of Article 31-C; this would show that a Constitutional
amendment which takes away or abridges the right to challenge the validity
of an ordinary law for violating the fundamental right under that Article
would not destroy or damage the basic structure. The only logical basis for
supporting the validity of Articles 31-A, 31-B and the first part of 31-C is
that Article 14 is not a basic structure.
333. Counsel for the respondent, however, submitted that even if Article 14
does not pertain to basic structure, equality is an essential feature of
democracy and rule of law and that Clause (4), by dispensing with the
application of the law relating to election petition and matters connected
therewith to the appellant 6 has made an unreasonable distinction between
persons similarly situated and has thereby damaged or destroyed that
essential feature, and therefore, the clause is bad. He said that in so far as
laws are general instructions to act or refrain from acting in certain ways in
specified circumstances enjoined upon persons of a specified kind, they
enjoin uniform behavior in identical cases; that to fall under a law is
protanto to be assimilated to a single pattern; and that a plea for rule of law
in this sense is, in essence, a plea for life in accordance with laws as
opposed to other standards, namely, the ad hoc dispensation from its
operation. He argued that if some persons, for no stated reason, and in
accordance with no rule, obtain exemption from the operation of law, while
persons who are sufficiently similar in relevant characteristics are governed
by it, that is manifestly unfair, for, to allow some persons to do that which is
forbidden to all others is irrational.
334. Democracy proceeds on two basic assumptions : (1) popular
sovereignty in the sense that the country should be governed by the
representatives of the people; that all power came from them; at their
pleasure and under their watchful supervision it must be held; and (2) that
there should be equality among the citizens in arriving at the decisions
affecting them. See Robert A. Dahl : "A Preface to Democratic Theory", pp.
4-33 : and Bryce : Modern Democracies, Vol. II, p. 9.
335. Today, it is impossible to conceive of a democratic republican form of
Government without equality of citizens. It is true that in the republics of
Athens and Rome there were slaves who were regarded as chattels. And,
even in the United States of America, there was a republic even before the
Negroes were enfranchised. Our Constitution envisages the establishment of
a democratic republican form of Government based on adult suffrage.
336. Equality is a multi-coloured concept incapable of a single definition. It
is a notion of many shades and connotations. The preamble of the
Constitution guarantees equality of status and of opportunity. They are
nebulous concepts. And I am not sure whether they can provide a solid
foundation to rear a basic structure. I think the types of equality which our
democratic republic guarantees are all subsumed under specific articles of
the Constitution like Articles 14, 15, 16, 17, 25, etc., and there is no other
principle of equality which is an essential feature of our democratic policy.
337. In the opinion of some of the judges constitution the majority in
Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 Rule of Law is a basic
structure of the Constitution apart from democracy.
338. The rule of law postulates the pervasiveness of the spirit of law
throughout the whole range of Government in the sense of excluding
arbitrary official action in any sphere. 'Rule of law' is an expression to give
reality to something which is not readily expressible. That is why Sir Ivor
Jennings said that it is an unruly horse. Rule of law is based upon the liberty
of the individual and has as its object, the harmonizing of the opposing
notions of individual liberty and public order. The notion of justice maintains
the balance between the two; and justice has a variable content. Dicey's
formulation of the rule of law, namely, "the absolute supremacy or
predominance of regular law, as opposed to the influence of arbitrary power,
excluding the existence of arbitrariness, of prerogative, even of wide
discretionary authority on the part of the Government" has been discarded
in the later editions of his book. That is because it was realized that it is not
necessary that where law ends, tyranny should begin. As Culp Davis said,
where the law ends, discretion begins and the exercise of discretion may
mean either beneficence or tyranny, either justice or injustice, either
reasonableness or arbitrariness. There has been no Government or legal
system in world history which did not involve both rules and discretion. It is
impossible to find a Government of laws alone and not of men in the sense
of eliminating all discretionary powers. All Governments are Governments of
laws and of men. Jerome Frank has said:
This much we can surely say : For Aristotle, from whom Harrington
derived the notion of a Government of laws and not of men, that
notion was not expressive of hostility to what today we call
administrative discretion. Nor did it have such a meaning for
Harrington." See "If Men were Angels" (1942), p. 203.
339. Another definition of rule of law has been given by Friedrich A. Hayek
in his books : "Road to Serfdom" and "Constitution of Liberty". It is much
the same as that pro pounded by the Franks Committee in England, Report (1957) p. 6: The rule of law stands for the view that decisions should be made
by the application of known principles or laws. In general such
decisions will be predictable, and the citizen will know where he is.
On the other hand there is what is arbitrary. A decision may be
made without principle, without any rules. It is therefore
unpredictable, the antithesis of a decision taken in accordance with
the rule of law.
340. This Court said in Jaisinghani v. Union of India MANU/SC/0361/1967 :
[1967]65ITR34(SC) that the rule of law from one point of view means that
decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules,
and, in general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should
know where he is.
341. This exposition of the rule of law is only the aspiration for an ideal and
it is not based on any down-to-earth analysis of practical problems with
which a modern government is confronted. In the world of action, this ideal
cannot be worked out and that is the reason why this exposition has been
rejected by all practical men.
342. If it is contrary to the rule of law that discretionary authority should be
given to government departments or public officers, then there is no rule of
law in any modern state. A judge who passes a sentence has no other
guidance except a statute which says that the person may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to, say, a period of ten years. He
must exercise considerable discretion. The High Courts and the Supreme
Court overrule their precedents. What previously announced rules guide
them in laying down the new precedents? A court of law decides a case of
first impression; no statute governs, no precedent is applicable. It is
precisely because a judge cannot find a previously announced rule that he
becomes a legislator to a limited extent All these would show that it is
impossible to enunciate the rule of law which has as its basis that no
decision can be made unless there is a certain rule to govern the. decision.
See "Discretionary Justice" by K.C. Davis.
343. Leaving aside these extravagant versions of rule of law there is a
genuine concept of rule of law and that concept implies equality before the
law or equal subjection of all classes to the ordinary law. But, if rule of law is
to be a basic structure of the Constitution, one must find specific provisions
in the Constitution embodying the constituent elements of the concept. I
cannot conceive of rule of law as a twinkling star up above the Constitution.
To be a basic structure, it must be a terrestrial concept having its habitat
within the four corners of the Constitution.
The provisions of the Constitution were enacted with a view to ensure the
rule of law. Even if I assume that rule of law is a basic structure, it seems to
me that the meaning and the constituent elements of the concept must be
gathered from the enacting provisions of the Constitution. The equality
aspect of the rule of law and of democratic republicanism is provided in
Article 14. May be, the other articles referred to do the same duty.
344. Das, C.J. said that Article 14 combines the English doctrine of the rule
of law and the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment to the
American Federal Constitution. Basheshar Nath v. The Commr., of I. T.
MANU/SC/0064/1958 : [1959]35ITR190(SC) . In State of Bengal v. Anwar
Ali Sarkar, Patanjali Sastri, C J. observed that the first part of the Article
which has been adopted from the Irish Constitution, is a declaration of
equality of the civil rights of all persons within the territories of India and
thus enshrines what American judges regard as the "basic principle of
republicanism" CF. Ward v. Flood (1874) 17 Am Rep 405 and that the
second part which is a corollary of the first is based on the last clause of the
first section of the Fourteenth Amendment of the American Constitution. So,
the concept of equality which is basic to rule of law and that which" is
regarded as the most fundamental postulate of republicanism are both
embodied in Article 14. If, according to the majority in Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 Article 14 does not pertain to basic
structure of the Constitution which is the other principle of equality
incorporated in the Constitution which can be a basic structure of the
Constitution or an essential feature of democracy or rule of law? However, it
is unnecessary to pursue this aspect of the question as I have already given
reasons to show Clause (4) to be bad.
345. I think Clause (4) is bad for the reasons which I have already
summarized. Clauses (1) to (3) of Article 329-A are severable but I express
no opinion on their validity as it is not necessary for deciding this case.
346. Then the question is, whether the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Act, 1974, and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act. 1975,
are liable to be challenged for the reason that they damage or destroy a
basic structure of the Constitution. Counsel for the respondent submitted
that, if. by a Constitutional amendment, the basic structure of the
Constitution cannot be destroyed or damaged, it would be illogical to
assume that an ordinary law passed under a power conferred by that
instrument can do so and since these Acts damage the concept of free and
fair election, the Acts were bad.
347. I think the inhibition to destroy or damage the basic structure by an
amendment of the Constitution flows from the limitation on the power of
amendment under Article 368 read into it by the majority in Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 because of their assumption that
there are certain fundamental features in the Constitution which its makers
intended to remain there in perpetuity. But I do not find any such inhibition
so far as the power of parliament or state legislatures to pass laws is
concerned. Articles 245 and 246 give the power and also provide the
limitation upon the power of these organs to pass laws. It is only the specific
provisions enacted in the Constitution which could operate as limitation
upon that power. The preamble, though a part of the Constitution, is neither
a source of power nor a limitation upon that power. The preamble sets out
the ideological aspirations of the people. The essential features of the great
concepts set out in the preamble are delineated in the various provisions of
the Constitution. It is these specific provisions in the body of the
Constitution which determine the type of democracy which the founders of
that instrument established, the quality and nature of justice, political, social
and economic which was their desideratum, the content of liberty of thought
and expression which they entrenched in that document, the scope of
equality of status and of opportunity which they enshrined in it. These
specific provisions enacted in the Constitution alone can determine the basic
structure of the Constitution as established. These specific provisions, either
separately or in combination determine the content of the great concepts
set out in the preamble. It is impossible to spin out any concrete concept of
basic structure out of the gossamer concepts set out in the preamble. The
specific provisions of the Constitution are the stuff from which the basic
structure has to be woven. The argument of counsel for the respondent
proceeded on the assumption that there are certain norms for free and fair
election in an ideal democracy and the law laid down by parliament or state
legislatures must be tested on those norms and, if found wanting, must be
struck down. The norms of election set out by parliament or state
legislatures tested in the light of the provisions of the Constitution or
necessary implications therefrom constitute the law of the land. That law
cannot be sub ject to any other test, like the test of free and fair election in
an ideal democracy.
348. I do not think that an ordinary law can be declared invalid for the
reason that it goes against the vague concepts of democracy; justice,
political, economic and social; liberty of thought, belief and expression; or
equality of status and opportunity, or some invisible radiation from them.
...(N)o political terms have been so subjected to contradictory
definitions as 'democracy' and 'democratic' since it has become
fashionable and profitable for every and any state to style itself in
this way. The Soviet Union and communist states of Eastern
Europe, the Chinese People's Republic, North Korea and North
Vietnam all call themselves democracies. So does Nasser's Egypt;
so does General Stoessner's Paraguay; so did Sukarno's Indonesia.
Yet, if anything is clear, it is that these states do not all meet the
same definition of democracy. see Finer : Comparative Government (1970) pp. 62-63. Definitions are important, for, they are responsible in the last analysis for
our image of democracy. The question is not only what does the word
'democracy' mean but also what is the thing. And, when we try to answer
this latter query, we discover that the thing does not correspond to the
word. So, although 'democracy' has a precise literal meaning, that does not
really help us to understand what an actual democracy is. In the real world,
R. A. Dahl has pointed out that, democracies are 'polyarchies'. The term
democracy has not only a descriptive or denotative function but also a
normative and persuasive function. therefore, the problem of defining
democracy is two-fold, requiring both a descriptive and prescriptive
function. To avoid pitfalls, it is necessary to keep in mind two things-first,
that a firm distinction should be made between the js and the ought of
democracy, and, second, that the prescriptive and the descriptive definitions
of democracy must not be confused, because the democratic ideal does not
define the democratic reality and vice versa; the real democracy is not and
cannot be the same as the ideal one. See "Democratic Theory" by Giovanni
Sartori, Chapter I. One cannot test the validity of an ordinary law with
reference to the essential elements of an ideal democracy. It can be tested
only with reference to the principles of democracy actually incorporated in
the Constitution.
349. Nor can it be tested on the touchstone of justice. The modem Pilate
asks. What is justice? and stays not for an answer. To Hans Kelsen justice is
an irrational ideal, and regarded from the point of rational cognition, he
thinks there are only interests and hence conflict of interests. Their solution,
according to him, can be brought about by an order that satisfies one
interest at the expense of the other or seeks to achieve a compromise
between opposing interests. "General Theory of taw and State" 1946, p. 13.
Mr. Allen has said that the concept of social justice is vague and indefinite.
"Aspects of Justice" p. 31. Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship are not absolute concepts. They are emotive words. They mean
different things to different, people. Equality of status and of opportunity are
concepts laden with emotional overtones. In their absoluteness they are
incapable of actual realisation. The enacting provisions in the body of the
Constitution alone give concrete shape to these ideas and it is on the basis
of these provisions that the validity of ordinary law should be tested.
350. The democracy which our Constitution-makers established is based on
the representation of the people in the law-making organs. The method by
which this representation has to be effectuated has been provided in the
Constitution. Part XV of the Constitution deals with the topic of elections.
Article 326 provides that elections to the House of the people and to the
legislative assemblies of States should be on the basis of adult suffrage.
Articles 327 and 328 provide for making of laws with respect to- all matters
relating to, or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or
to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State including the
preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other
matters necessary for securing the due Constitution of such House or
Houses. The validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies
or the allotment of seats to the constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under Article 327 or Article 328 shall not be called in question in any
court (see Article 329(a)).
351. This would indicate that the Constitution has entrusted the task of
framing the law relating to election to parliament, and, subject to the law
made by parliament, to the State legislatures. An important branch of the
law which sounds in the area of free and fair election, namely, delimitation
of constituencies and allotment of seats to such constituencies is put beyond
the cognizance of court. When it is found that the task of writing the
legislation on the subject has been committed to parliament and state
legislatures by the Constitution, ' is it competent for a court to test its
validity on the basis of some vague norms of free and fair election? I think
not. As I said, like other laws made by parliament or state legislatures, the
laws made under Articles 327 and 328 are liable to be tested by Part III of
the Constitution or any other provision of the Constitution; but it is difficult
to see how these laws could be , challenged on the ground that they do not
conform to some ideal notions of free and fair election to be evolved by the
court from out of bairy nothing.
352. The doctrine of the 'spirit' of the Constitution is a slippery slope. The
courts are not at liberty to declare an act void, because, in their opinion, it
is opposed to the spirit of democracy or republicanism supposed to pervade
the Constitution but not expressed in words. When the fundamental law has
not limited, either in terms or by necessary implication, the general powers
conferred upon the legislature, we cannot declare a limitation under the
notion of having discovered some ideal norm : of free and fair election.
353. Cooley has observed that courts are not at liberty to declare statutes
void because they appear to the minds of the judges to violate fundamental
principles of republican government, unless it shall be found that those
principles are placed beyond legislative encroachment by the Constitution.
The principles of democratic republican government are not a set of
inflexible rules : and unless they are specifically incorporated in the
Constitution, no law can be declared bad merely because the Court thinks
that it is opposed to some implication drawn from the concept. see
Constitutional Limitations, 8th ''ed., Vol. 1. 99. 349-352.
354. Counsel for the respondent relied upon the observations of Sikri, C.J.
at p. 216, Shelat and Grover JJ. at p. 292, Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. at p.
355 and Reddy, J. at p. 556 in their judgments in Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 in support of his contention that
when these Acts were put in the Ninth Schedule by the Constitutional
amendment, their provisions became vulnerable to attack if they or any one
of them damaged or destroyed the basic features of democracy or
republicanism.
355. Sikri, C.J. has said that the Constitution 29th Amendment Act, 1971, is
ineffective to protect the impugned Acts there if they abrogate or take away
fundamental rights. This would not show that the learned Chief Justice
countenanced any challenge to an Act on the ground that the basic structure
of the Constitution has been damaged or destroyed by its provisions not
constituted by the fundamental rights abrogated or taken away. In other
words,1 if by taking away or abridging the fundamental rights, the basic
structure of the Constitution is damaged or destroyed, then according to the
learned Chief Justice, the legislation would be vulnerable on that score, even
though it is put in the Ninth Schedule by a Constitutional amendment. But it
would not follow that an Act so put can be challenged for a reason not
resulting from the taking away or abrogation of the fundamental right. To
put it differently, even though an Act is put in the Ninth Schedule by a
Constitutional amendment, its provisions would be open to attack on the
ground that they destroy or damage the basic structure if the fundamental
right or rights taken away or abrogated pertains or pertain to basic
structure. But the Act cannot be attacked, if I may say so, for a collateral
reason, namely, that the provisions of the Act have destroyed or damaged
some other basic structure, say, for instance, democracy or separation of
powers.
356. Shelat and Grover, JJ. have said in their judgment that the 29th
Amendment is valid, but the question whether the Acts included in the Ninth
Schedule by that Amend ment or any provision of those Acts abrogates any
of the basic elements of the Constitutional structure or de nudes them of
their identity will have to be examined when the validity of those Acts comes
up for consideration. Similar observations have been made by Hegde and
Mukherjea. JJ. and by Reddy, J. Khanna, J. only said that the 29th
Amendment was valid.
357. It is rather strange that an Act which is put in the Ninth Schedule with
a view to obtain immunity from attack on the ground that the provisions
thereof violate the fundamental rights should suddenly become vulnerable
on the score that they damage or destroy a basic structure of the
Constitution resulting not from the taking away or abridgment of the
fundamental rights but for some other reason.
358. There is no support from the majority in Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 for the proposition advanced by
counsel that an ordinary law, if it damages or destroys basic structure
should be held bad or for the proposition, that a Constitutional amendment
putting an Act in the Ninth Schedule would make the provisions of the Act
vulnerable for the reason that they damage or destroy a basic structure
constituted not by the fundamental rights taken away or abridged but some
other basic structure. And, in principle, I see no reason for accepting the
correctness of the proposition.
359. The Constitution-makers eschewed to incorporate the 'due process'
clause in that instrument apprehending that the vague contours of that
concept will make the court a third chamber. The concept of a basic
structure as brooding omnipresence in the sky apart from the specific
provisions of the Constitution constitution it is too vague and indefinite to
provide a yardstick to determine the validity of an ordinary law.
360. So if it be assumed that these election laws amendment Acts, even
after they were put in the Ninth Schedule by Constitutional amendment
remained open to attack for contravention, if any, of the fundamental rights,
these Acts would not be open to attack on the ground that their provisions
destroyed or damaged an essential feature of democracy, namely, free and
fair election. The Acts remain part of the ordinary law of the land. They did
not attain the status of Constitutional law merely because they were put in
the Ninth Schedule. The utmost that can be said is, as I indicated, that even
after Dutting them in the Ninth Schedule, their provisions would be open to
challenge on the ground that they took away or abrogated all or any of the
fundamental rights and therefore damaged or destroyed ,a basic structure if
the fundamental rights or right taken away or abrogated constitute or
constitutes a basic, structure.
361. Counsel for the respondent then contended that retrospective
operation has been given to the provisions of these Acts and that that would
destroy or damage an essential feature of democracy viz., free and fair
elections. The argument was that if one set of laws existed when an election
was held and the result announced, you cannot thereafter substitute
another set of laws and say that those laws must be deemed to have been
in operation at the time when the election was held and the result
announced, as that would lead to inequality, injustice and unfairness.
362. Retrospective operation of law in the field of election has been upheld
by this Court (see Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand MANU/SC/0275/1969 :
[1970]2SCR835 . Retrospective operation of any law would cause hardship
to some persons or other. This is inevitable; but that is no reason to deny to
the legislature the power to enact retrospective law. In the case of a law
which has retrospective effect, the theory is that the law was actually in
operation in the past and if the provisions of the Acts are general in their
operation, there can be no challenge to them on the ground of
discrimination or unfairness merely because of their retrospective effect. In '
other words, if an Act cannot be challenged on the ground that its provisions
are discriminatory or unreasonable if it is prospective in operation, those
provisions cannot be attacked on these grounds merely because the
provisions were given retrospective effect, unless there are special
circumstances. I see no such special circumstances here.
363. I therefore hold that these Acts are not liable to be challenged on any
of the grounds argued by counsel.
364. Counsel for the respondent submitted that the session of parliament in
which the Election Laws Amendment Act. 1975 and the 39th Amendment to
the Constitution were passed was not properly convened and therefore the
amendments were invalid.
365. The argument was that a number of members of the two Houses of
Parliament, were illegally detained by executive orders before the
summon ing of the two Houses and that was made possible by the President-
the authority to summon  the two Houses-making an order under Article 359
of the Constitution on 27-6-1975, which precluded these members from
moving the court and obtaining release from illegal detention and attending
the session. In effect, the contention of counsel was that the authority to
summon  parliament effectually prevented by its order made under Article
359. those members who were illegally detained from attending the session
and, as the composition of the session was unconstitutional, any measure
passed in the session would be bad. Reliance was placed by counsel upon
the decision in A. Nambiar v. Chief Secretary MANU/SC/0060/1965 :
1966CriLJ586 in support of this proposition.
366. The question which fell for consideration in that case was whether,
when a member of parliament was convicted for a criminal offence and was
undergoing a sentence in pursuance thereof, he has an unconditional right
to attend a session of. parliament. This Court held that he had no privilege
which obliged the court to release him from custody in order to enable him
to attend the session. This decision has no relevance to the point in
controversy here.
367. In England, a member of parliament who is convicted of a criminal
offence and is undergoing sentence in pursuance to his conviction has no
right or privilege to be released from custody for attending parliament. The
very same principle will apply in the case of a detention under an
emergency regulation. see May's Parliamentary Practice, 18th ed., p. 103.
368. In England, it was taken as settled that parliamentary roll is conclusive
of the question that a bill has been passed by both houses of parliament and
has received royal assent and no court can look behind the roll as such an
inquiry would be an interference with the privilege of parliament. Lord
Campbell said in Edinburgh & Dalkeith Ry. v. Wauchope (1842) 8 CI & F
710:
I think it right to say a word or two upon the point that has been
raised with regard to an Act of Parliament being held inoperative by
a court of justice because the forms prescribed by the two Houses
to be observed in the passing of a Bill have not been exactly
followed I cannot but express my surprise that such a notion should
have prevailed. There is no foundation for it All that a court of
justice can do is to look to the Parliamentary Roll; If from that it
should appear that a Bill has passed both Houses and received the
Royal Assent, no court of justice can inquire into the mode in Which
it was introduced in Parliament, nor into what was done previous to
its introduction, or what passed in Parliament during its progress in
its various stages through both Houses.
369. It has since been said that Parliamentary Roll is not conclusive, that
when the jurisdiction of a court is invoked, it has power to determine
whether everything necessary has been done for the production of a valid
statute, that rule of law requires that the court should determine legal
questions raised before it and if its jurisdiction is properly invoked, it has to
answer the question whether the document is a statute duly enact-ed by a
parliament. The view as propounded has been summarized as follows:
(1) Sovereignty is a legal concept : the rules which identify the
sovereign and prescribe its composition and functions are logically
prior to it.
(2) There is a distinction between rules which govern, on the one
hand, (a) the composition, and (b) the procedure, and on the other
hand (c) the area of power, of a sovereign legislature.
(3) The courts have jurisdiction to question the validity of an
alleged Act of Parliament on grounds 2(a) and 2(b), but not on
ground 2(c)." see R.F.V. Heuston : Essays in Constitutional Law,
Second edition, pp. 6-7. The reasons for the view are these : When
the purported sovereign is anyone but a single actual person, the
designation of him must include the statement of rules for the
ascertainment of his will, and these rules, since their observance is
a condition of the validity of his legislation, are rules of law logically
prior to him. See Latham : "The Law and the Commonwealth" (O.
U, P. 1949) p. 523. The extraction of a precise expression of will
from a multiplicity of human beings is, despite all the realists say,
an artificial process and one which cannot be accomplished without
arbitrary rules. It is therefore an incomplete statement to say that
in a state such and such an assembly of human beings is sovereign.
It can only be sovereign when acting in a certain way prescribed by
law. At least some rudimentary manner and form is demanded of it
: the simultaneous incoherent cry of a rabble, small or large, cannot
be law, for it is unintelligible. See Latham : "What is an Act of
Parliament"? 1939 Kings Counsel 152.
370. Sir Frederick Pollock has said that supreme legal power is in one sense
limited by the rules which prescribe how it shall be exercised. Even if no
Constitutional rule places a limit or boundary to what can be done by
sovereign legal authority, the organs which are to exercise it must be
delimited and defined by rules. See Geoffrey Marshall : Constitutional Theory. P. 40-41. 371. So, the questions to be asked are : how is parliament composed? How
does parliament express its will?
372. The rules which identify the sovereign are as important as the
institution so identified. If this is so, it is open to the court to see whether a
parliament has been properly summoned in order to decide the question
whether a measure passed by it answers the description of a statute or an
Act and that parliamentary roll, if such a thing exists, is not conclusive.
373. As to Parliamentary Roll, Heuston has said:
The 'Parliamentary Roll', whatever exactly it may have been,
disappeared in England a century ago, though even good authors
sometimes write as if it still exists. Since 1849 there has been no
'Roll', simply two prints of the Bill on durable vellum by Her
Majesty's Stationery Office, which are signed by the Clerk of the
Parliament and regarded as the final official copies. One is
preserved in the Public Record Office and one in the library of the
House of Lords". Essays in Constitutional Law, p. 18 (2nd ed.).
374. Article 122(1) provides that the validity of any proceedings in
Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged
irregularity of procedure. So, even if there is any irregularity in the
procedure in the passing of the statute, it is not open to a court to question
its validity. But this is distinct from the question whether the two Houses
have been properly summoned and the composition of the Session was
proper.
375. The Solicitor General said that if a member is excluded from
participating in the proceedings of a House, that is a matter concerning the
privilege of that House as the grievance is one of exclusion from the
proceedings within the 'walls of the
House. And, in regard to the right to be exercised within the walls of the
House, the House itself is the judge. He referred to May's Parliamentary
Practice (18th ed. pp. 82-83) and also to Bradlaugh v. Gossett (1884) 12
QBD 271 in this connection. He further said that if an outside agency
illegally prevents a member from participating in the proceedings of the
House, the House has power to secure his presence in the House and cited
May's Parliamentary Practice (18th ed. pp. 92-95.) to support the
proposition.
376. These passages throw no light on the question in issue here. Ever since
the decision of Holt C.J. in Ashby v. White (1703) 14 St. T Rule 695 it has
been settled that privilege is part of the common law and cannot affect
rights to be exercised outside or independently of the House. Regularity of
internal proceedings is one thing; the Constitutional rights of the subject are
another; and it is the latter which are in issue in a case where the question
is whether the document is a statute. See Heuston : Essays in Constitutional Law, 2nd ed., p. 22. 377. Article 85(1) provides that the President shall from time to time
summon  each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he
thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one
session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
378. The detention of these members of parliament was by statutory
authorities in the purported exercise of their statutory power. It would be
strange if a statutory authority, by an order which turns out to be illegal,
could prevent the Houses of Parliament from meeting as enjoin ed by Article
85. If a statutory authority passes an illegal order of detention and thus
prevents a member off parliament from attending the House, how can the
proceedings of parliament become illegal for that reason? It is the privilege
of parliament to secure the attendance of persons illegally detained. But
what would hap pen if the privilege is not exercised by parliament? I do not
think that the proceedings of parliament would become illegal for that
reason.
379. The suspension of the remedy for the enforcement of fundamental
rights by the order of the President under Article 359 is dependent upon a
valid proclamation of emergency under Article 352. If a situation arose
which authorized the President to issue a proclamation under Article 352, he
could also suspend, under Article 359, the remedy to move the court to
enforce the fundamental rights. These are the Constitutional functions of the
President and unless it is established that the proclamation made by the
President under Article 352 or the suspension under Article 359 of the
remedy for enforcement of fundamental rights is unconstitutional, it is
impossible to hold that the President has, in any way, illegally prevented the
release of these members from the supposed illegal detention so as to make
a session of parliament unconstitutional, in consequence of the inability of
those members to attend the session. In other words, the President, in
performing his Constitutional function under these articles has not
authorized the illegal detention of any person let alone any member of
parliament or unconstitutionally prevented the release from custody of any
member. He has only discharged his Constitutional functions. If this be so, it
is difficult to hold that the session in which the amendments were passed
was illegally convened. The challenge to the validity of the amendments on
this score must be overruled.
380. Counsel for the respondent submitted that it is immaterial when a
candidate committed a corrupt practice-whether it was before or after he
became a candidate-and that an election would be set aside even if a person
committed the corrupt practice before he became a candidate. Section 79
(b) of the Representation of the People Act. 1951, defined the word
'candidate' as follows:
'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been
duly nominated as a candidate at any election, and any such person
shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the time when,
with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out as a
prospective candidate.
Clause 7 of the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, substituted the
present definition in Section 79(b) which reads:
'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been
duly nominated as a candidate at an election.
381. In support of the proposition that an election can be set aside even if a
person has committed corrupt practice of bribery before he became a
candidate, counsel cited Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd ed., Volume 14, pages 222 (para. 386) and 218 (para. 380). 382. These paragraphs state that in order to constitute the offence of
bribery, it does not matter how long before an election a bribe is given,
provided that the bribe is operative at the time of the election, and that,
time is material only when considering the question of evidence.
383. Counsel further said that under Section 100 of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951, an election is liable to be set aside if it is found under
Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of that section that a returned candidate has
committed corrupt practice; that ex hypothesi, a returned candidate cannot
commit a corrupt practice, and therefore, it is not the description of a
person as a returned candidate that is material. He argued that if in Section
100(1)(b) the word 'returned candidate' is used not with the idea of
indicating that a person should have committed corrupt practice after he
became a returned candidate, there is no reason to think that the word
'candidate' in Section 123(7) has been used to show that the corrupt
practice therein mentioned should have been committed after a person has
become a 'candidate' in order that the election of the candidate might be set
aside.
384. There can be no doubt that Section 100(1)(b), when it speaks of
commission of corrupt practice by a returned candidate, it can only mean
commission of corrupt practice by a candidate before he became a returned
candidate. Any other reading of the sub-section would be absurd. But there
is no such compulsion to read the word 'candidate' in Section 123(7) in the
same manner. It is the context that gives colour to a word. A word is not
crystal clear. Section 79 of the Act indicates that the definitions therein have
to be read subject to the context.
385. The legislature must fix some point of time before which a person
cannot be a 'candidate' in an election, and, a wide latitude must be given to
the legislature in fixing that point. In Union of India v. Parameswaran Match Works, civil Appeals Nos. 262-273. 587-591 and 1351-1402 of 1971 and 1883-1921 of 1972, D/- 4-11-1974 - (reported in MANU/SC/0094/1974 :
1978(2)ELT436(SC) ) this Court observed:
The choice of a date as a basis for classification cannot always be
dubbed as arbitrary even if no particular reason is forthcoming for
the choice unless it is shown to be capricious or whimsical in the
circumstances. When it is seen that a line or point there must be,
and there is no mathematical or logical way of fixing it precisely, the
decision of the legislature or its delegate must be accepted unless
we can say that it is very wide of the reasonable mark. See
Louisville Gas Co. v. Alabama Power Co. 240 US 30 32 per Justice
Holmes.
386. The learned Chief Justice has, in his judgment, referred to the relevant
English statutes and the decisions of the English Courts bearing on this point
and has pointed out the difference between the English Law and the Indian
Law. I do not consider it necessary to cover the same ground. I agree with
his conclusion on the ooint.
387. I would therefore hold that even if it be assumed that the finding of the
High Court that the appellant obtained or procured the assistance of Shri
Yashpal Kapur during the period from January 7 to 24, 1971, is correct, the
appellant shall not be deemed to have committed corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, as she
became a candidate only on February 1. 1971. The learned Chief Justice has
also dealt with the contention urged by counsel for respondent that Clause
8(b) of the Election Laws Amendment Act, 1975 suffers from the vice of
excessive delegation and is arbitrary. I agree with his reasoning for repelling
the 6ame.
388. There can be no dispute that if the Election Laws Amendment Act,
1975, is valid, the appeal has to be allowed. I would, therefore, set aside
the findings of the High Court against the appellant and allow the appeal
without any order as to costs. In the cross appeal, the only question raised
was about the correctness of the finding of the High Court that the appellant
has not exceeded the prescribed limit of election expense. For the reasons
given by Khanna, J. in his judgment, I hold that the finding of the High
Court on this issue was correct. In this view, I have no occasion to reach the
other questions argued. I would dismiss the cross appeal without any order
as to costs.
M. Hameedullah Beg, J.
389. There are two Election Appeals Nos. 887 and 909 of 1975, before us
under Section 116-A of the Representation of the People Act of 1951
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'). They are directed against decisions on
different issues contained in the same judgment of a learned Judge of the
Allahabad High Court allowing en election petition filed fey Shri Raj Narain
(hereinafter referred to as the 'Election Petitioner'), a defeated candidate at
the election held in February. 1971, for the membership of the Lok Sabha or
the House of the People against Shrimati Indira Nehru Gandhi, the Prime
Minister of India (hereinafter referred to as 'the Original Respondent'). The
election petitioner is the respondent in Appeal No. 887 of 1975 filed by the
original respondent. He is the appellant in Appeal No. 909 of 1975 where the
original respondent is the contesting respondent.
390. Before the election case, instituted on 24-4-1971, could be decided by
the trial Court, an explanation was added to Section 77(1) of the Act. It had
some bearing on questions relating to the expenses incurred on the original
respondent's election, sought to be raised by the election petitioner, but. on
findings of fact recorded by the trial Court, it became immaterial for the
merits of the case and would continue to be that so long as the election
petitioner is unable to dislodge the trial Court's findings on election
expenses. Other amendments were made by the Election Laws
(Amendment) Act No. 40 of 1975, (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act of
1975'), notified on 6-8-1975, after the decision of the case by the learned
Judge of the Allahabad High Court on 12-6-1975 and after the filing of the
appeals before us. These amendments deal directly with several questions
decided by the Allahabad High Court which were pending consideration
before this Court. Finally, came the Constitution (Thirty-ninth) Amendment
Act of 1975, (hereinafter referred to as the '39th Amendment'), gazetted on
10-8-1975, just before the commencement of the hearing of the appeals by
this Court.
391. It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the original respondent in
his opening address, that Section 4 of the 39th Amendment, adding Clause
(4) to Article 329-A of the Constitution, meant' that Parliament itself, acting
in its constituent capacity, had taken the case in hand and had, after
applying its own standards, decided it in favour of the original respondent so
that the jurisdiction of this Court to go into the merits of the case was
ousted by Clause (4), read with Clauses (5) and (6). sought to be add ed to
Article 329-A of the Constitution. It was submitted by him that each one of
the amendments of the Act was aimed at removing genuine uncertainties or
doubts about what the law was so that it may be brought into the line with
what it had been previously understood to be as declared by this Court, or,
in any case, with what Parliament, correctly exercising its unquestionable
law making powers, thought that it should be.
392. The constantly recurring and vehemently pressed theme of the
arguments of the learned Counsel for the election petitioner was that the
context and the contents of the Acts of 1974 and 1975, and. after that of
Section 4 of the 39th Amendment, clearly indicated that the whole object of
the Acts of 1974 and 1975 and of the Constitutional amendment was an
oblique one : to deprive the election petitioner of the remedies he had under
the law against an election vitiated by corrupt practices, and of the benefits
of a decision of the High Court in his favour by taking away its grounds and
then the jurisdiction of Courts, which existed at the me of the 39th
Amendment, to deal with the case so that this case may not, in any event,
terminate in favour of the election petitioner. It was repeatedly suggested by
the learned Counsel for the election petitioner throughout his arguments,
that the law making powers had been really abused by a majority in
Parliament for the purposes of serving majority party and personal ends
which were Constitutionally unauthorised. It was even alleged that the
President of India had also become a party to the misuse of Constitutional
powers by passing an ordinance depriving Courts of jurisdiction to entertain
Habeas Corpus petitions so that members of Parliament belonging to op
position parties, detained under preventive detention laws, may not secure
re lease and oppose proposals which became embodied in the 1975 Act and
the 39th Amen dment. It is when the country is faced with issues of this
nature that the Constitutionally vital role of the judicature, as a co-ordinate
and independent organ of a democratic system of Government, comes into
prominence and has to be performed without fear or favour, affection or ill
will as the custodian of con stitutionality.
393. In the circumstances indicated above, it seemed to me to be absolutely
essential for us to call upon the parties defending or assailing the 39th
Amendment and the Acts of 1974 and 1975, to take us, inter alia, into the
merits of the cases of the two sides and the findings given by the trying
Judge so as to enable us to see how far these findings were justifiable under
the law as it stood even before the amendments by the Acts of 1974 and
1975, how they were affected by these amendments, and how they were
related to the validity of Section 4 of the 39th Amendment. Speaking for
myself, I clearly indicated to learned Counsel for the parties that I regard
the nature and merits of the case decided to be of crucial importance not
only in considering the validity of the 39th Amendment and of the Acts of
1974 and 1975 but also in the wider interests of justice which are bound to
be served by the vindication of the case of the party which should, on
merits, win. Elementary considerations of justice required that the party
with a better case should not be deprived of an opportunity of justifying its
position, on facts and law touching the merits of the case, in the highest
Court of the land, particularly when the original respondent, who happens to
be the Prime Minister of this country, was accused of corrupt practices to
secure her election and then of abuse of Constitutional power and position
to shield them. The high office of the original respondent, far from disabling
this Court from investigating such allegations, ought to provide a good
ground for this Court to go into the merits of the case if we are not really
deprived of our jurisdiction to do that by Section 4 of the 39th Amendment.
This follows from the Rule of law. as I understand it, embodied in our
Constitution. National interests cannot, or, at least, should not, I believe,
suffer if justice and right, as determined by the highest Court in the country,
prevail.
394. Citizens of our country take considerable pride in being able to
challenge before superior Courts even an exercise of constituent power,
resting on the combined strength and authority of Parliament and the State
legislatures. This Court, when properly called upon by the humblest citizen,
in a proceeding before it, to test the Constitutional validity of either an
ordinary statute or of a Constitutional amendment, has to do so by applying
the criteria of basic Constitutional purpose and Constitutionally prescribed
procedure. The assumption underlying the theory of judicial review of all law
making, including fundamental law making is that Courts, acting as
interpreters of what has been described by some political (philosophers (See
: Bosanquet's "Philosophical Theory of the State" Chap. V, p. 96-115) as the
"Real Will" of the people, embodied in their Constitution and assumed to be
more lasting and just and rational and less liable to err than their "General
Will", reflected by the opinions of the majorities in Parliament and the State
Legislatures for the time being, can discover for the people the not always
easily perceived purposes of their Constitution. The Courts thus act as
agents and mouthpieces of the "Real Will" of the people themselves.
Although, Judges, in discharging their onerous Constitutional duties, cannot
afford to ignore the limitations of the judicial technique and their own
possibly greater liability to err than legislators could on socio-economic
issues and matters of either social philosophy, or practical policy, or political
opinion only. yet. they cannot, without violating their oaths of office, fail to
elucidate and up hold a basic Constitutional principle or norm unless
compelled by the law of the Constitution to abstain from doing so. One of
these basic principles seems to me to be that, just as Courts are not
Constitutionally competent to legislate under the guise of interpretation, so
also neither our Parliament nor any State Legislature, in the purported
exercise of any kind of lawmaking power, perform an essentially judicial
function by virtually withdrawing a particular case, pending in any Court,
and taking upon itself the duty to decide it by an application of law or its
own standards to the facts of that case. This power must at least be first
Constitutionally taken away from the Court concerned and vested in another
authority before it can be lawfully exercised by that other authority. It is not
a necessary or even a natural incident of a "Constituent power", As Hans
Kelsen points out, in his "General Theory of Law and the State", (See : p.
143), "while creation and annulment of all general norms, whether basic or
not so basic, is essentially a legislative function. their interpretation and
application to findings reached, after a correct ascertainment of facts
involved in an individual case, by employing the judicial technique, is really
a judicial function. Neither of the three Constitutionally separate organs of
State can, according to the basic scheme of our Constitution today, leap
outside the boundaries of its own Constitutionally assigned sphere or orbit of
authority into that of the other. This is the logical and natural meaning of
the principle of Supremacy of the Constitution.
395. Issues raised before us relating to the validity of the 39th Amendment
and the Acts of 1974 and 1975 were : What are the Constitutional purposes
and ambit of the "Constituent power" found in Article 368 of our
Constitution? Were they, in any way. exceeded by the constituent authorities
in making the 39th Amendment in an unauthorised manner, or, for objects
which, however, laudable, were outside the scope of Article 368? Was there
any procedural irregularity in the composition of Parliament which could
enable this Court to hold that there was a basic defect in the enactment of
either the 1975 Act or of the 39th Amendment? Whether provisions of the
Acts of 1974 and 1975 are immune from attack even on the ground that
they resulted in a departure from the "basic structure" of our Constitution as
explained by this Court in Kesavananda Bharti v. State of Kerala
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 by having been included in the 9th
Schedule of our Constitution, which does protect them from a challenge on
the ground of any contravention of Part III guaranteeing fundamental rights
to citizens and other persons, or, in other words, were the limits of the basic
structure only operative against Constitutional amendments or apply to
ordinary statutes as well? Are any of the provisions of the Acts of 1974 and
1975 void for departures from or damage to any part of the "basic
structure" of our Constitution or for any other excess or misuse of law
making powers?
396. We do not, when such a case comes up before us, concern ourselves
with the validity of provisions other than those which affect the case before
us. Nor do we consider the objects of any provision, in vacuo, divorced from
the facts of the case to be decided. therefore, parties had to and did address
us on the broad features of the findings given by the learned trial Judge and
the nature of the evidence given to support them so that we may be able to
decide, inter alia, whether any "validation" of the original respondent's
election, which was the evident purpose of Clause (4) of Article 329-A,
Sought to be added by Section 4 of the 39th Amendment, was at all
necessary. If that election was not really void and had been wrongly held by
the trial Court to be vitiated, it did not need to be Validated at all. In that
event, a purported validation would be an exercise in futility before this
Court had decided these appeals. Could it not be said that the intended
validation was premature inasmuch as it proceeded on a basically erroneous
premise that the original respondent's election was invalid when the
question of its validity was sub judice in this Court? How could such a
premise be assumed to be correct before this Court had gone into merits
and decided the appeals pending before it? Such an inquiry is not irrelevant
if the very nature and purpose of the exercise of a power are put in issue by
both sides.
397. If the existence of the judgment of the Allahabad High Court created
the impression that it must be assumed to be correct even before this Court
had pronounced upon the correctness of the judgment, the stay order given
by this Court should have removed it. The legal effect of that stay order was
that the trial Court's order, to use the language of Section 116-A(4) (sic)
(116-B(3)(?)) of the Act, "shall be deemed never to have taken effect".. It
did not matter if the stay order, out of deference for existing precedents,
had been framed in the form of a "conditioned" stay that is to say. a stay in
law and effect with certain conditions annexed. It was not a "conditional'
stay, indeed, having regard to the nature of the order the operation of which
was to be stayed there could be no "conditional" stay here. As to the legal
effect of such a stay order, there is no doubt in my mind that considering
the clear words of Section 116-A(4) (sic) (116-B(3)(?)) of the Act, it
deprived the order of the High Court of any operative force whatsoever
during the pendency of these appeals. There could be really no binding
precedent in discretionary matters depending on the facts and
circumstances of each case. The operation of the judgment of the trial Court
and the consequential orders are stayed only on "sufficient cause" shown on
the facts of that case. In the case before us, the sufficient cause seems to
me to be apparent from a bare perusal of the judgment of the trial Court. As
I have pointed out below, the judgment under appeal contains glaringly
erroneous conclusions. reached by ignoring what has been repeatedly laid
down in election cases by this Court, even if one were to assume, for the
sake of argument, that all the findings of fact recorded by the trial Court,
including some very questionable ones, on which its conclusions rest, were
correct.
398. In a case where the bona fides of legislation and even of a
Constitutional amendment, is questioned on the ground of a suggested
frightfulness in the facts of the case which Parliament and the ratifying State
Legislatures are to be supposed, if we are to accept the suggestion, to have
been acting in concert to prevent this Court from examining on merits it
was, I think, the duty of counsel making any such suggestion to invite our
attention to any fact not fully disclosed or discussed in the judgment under
appeal at least when he was asked, as I repeatedly asked him in the course
of his arguments extending over a period of about fifteen days out of a total
period of hearing of the case for thirty two days, how the trial Court's
conclusions on the two matters, forming the subject-matter of appeal No.
887 of 1975 of the original respondent, could possibly be justified. However,
I have also satisfied myself, by going through the whole evidence on record
on these two matters, which I shall presently deal with, that learned
Counsel for the, election petitioner could not possibly usefully add anything
to the replies he actually gave on the questions put to him on these matters
and to the discussion of the whole evidence on these questions by the trial
Court. I have taken pains to clarify this position as the learned Counsel for
the election petitioner at the end of arguments of both sides, extending over
thirty two days of actual hearing, stated that he had argued on the
assumption that we will be concerned only with the validity of the 39th
Amendment and the validity and correct interpretation of the Acts of 1974
and 1975. I think that it was made clear to him that we will have to enter
into the merits if that was necessary, as I think it is, for judging whether
amendments in law were either necessary or justified. Learned Counsel for
the election petitioner was not prevented from dealing with any question,
whether of fact or law, which he may have wanted to raise. Learned Counsel
for both sides had fully argued at least the election petitioner's appeal No.
909 of 1975 on facts and law. They had taken us sufficiently into facts and
findings involved in the original respondent's appeal No. 887 of 1975 to
justify our dealing with all questions necessary to decide this appeal on
merits also. Indeed, it is not necessary for us to go beyond findings of fact
recorded by the learned Judge, as distinct from conclusions based upon
them which are questions of law, to demonstrate the very palpable errors
committed by the learned Judge on the two questions which are the subject-
matter of appeal No. 887 of 1975.
399. Shrimati Indira Nehru Gandhi was elected to the House of the People
from the Rae Bareli constituency in Uttar Pradesh by an overwhelming
majority of 1,11,800 votes against Shri Raj Narain. As is not unusual, the
defeated candidate filed an election petition under the Act making all kinds
of allegations, including some quite extravagant ones, which form ed the
subject-matter of the first set of eleven issues framed on 19-8-1971. There
after, three additional issues were framed on 27-4-1973 when the question
whether an amendment of the petition, sought after the period of limitation
for filing a petition to challenge the election had expired, should be
permitted, had been finally decided by this Court in favour of Shri Raj
Narain.
400. The issues framed give an idea of the cases set up on behalf of the two
sides. They were:
ISSUES
1. Whether respondent No. 1 obtained and procured the assistance
of Yashpal Kapur in furtherance of the prospects of her election
while he was still a Gazetted Officer in the service of Government of
India. If so, from what date?
2. Whether at the instance of respondent No. 1 members of the
Armed Forces of the Union arranged Air Force Planes and
helicopters for her, flown by members of the Armed Forces, to
enable her to address election meetings on 1-2-1971 and 25-2-
1971, and if so, whether this constituted a corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act?
3. Whether at the instance of respondent No. 1 and her election
agent Yashpal Kapur, the District Magistrate of Rae Bareli. the
Superintendent of Police of Rae Bareli and the Home Secretary of
U.P. Government arranged for rostrums, loudspeakers and
barricades to be set up and for members of the Police Force to be
posted in connection with her election tour on 1-2-1971 and 25-2-
1971; and, if so whether this amounts to a corrupt practice under
Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act?
4. Whether quilts, blankets, dhoties and liquor were distributed by
agents and workers of respondent No. 1 with the con sent of her
election agent Yashpal Kapur, at the places and on the dates
mentioned in Schedule A of the petition in order to induce electors
to vote for her ?
5. Whether the particulars given in paragraph 10 and Schedule A of
the petition are too vague and general to afford a basis for
allegations of bribery under Section 123(1) of the Representation of
the People Act?
6. Whether by using the symbol cow and calf, which had been
allotted to her party by the Election Commission in her election
campaign the respondent No. 1 was guilty of making an appeal to a
religious symbol and committed a corrupt practice as defined' in
Section 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act?
7. Whether on the dates fixed for the poll voters were conveyed to
the polling stations free of charge on vehicles hired and procured
for the purpose by respondent No. 1's election agent Yashpal Kapur,
or other persons with his consent, as detailed in Schedule B to the
petition?
8. Whether the particulars given in paragraph 12 and Schedule B of
the petition are too vague and general to form a basis for
allegations regarding a corrupt practice under Section 123(5) of the
Representation of the People Act?
9. Whether respondent No. 1 and her election agent Yashpal Kapur
incurred or authorised expenditure in excess of the amount
prescribed by Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act
read with Rule 90 as detailed in para. 13 of the petition?
10. Whether the petitioner had made a security deposit in
accordance with the rules of the High Court as required by Section
117 of the Representation of the People Act?
11. To what relief, if any, is the petitioner entitled?
ADDITIONAL ISSUES
1. Whether respondent No. 1, obtained and procured the assistance
of Yashpal Kapur in furtherance of the prospects of her election
while he was still a Gazetted Officer in the service of the
Government of India. If so, from what date?
2. Whether respondent No. 1 held herself out as a candidate from
any date prior to 1-2-1971 and if so, from what date?
3. Whether Yashpal Kapur continued to be in the service of
Government of India from and after 14-1-1971 or till which date?
401. The High Court trying the case had. in the course of a lengthy
judgment rejected the election petitioner's case on issues Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7,
and 9 of the first set of issues, after minutely and meticulously scrutinizing
every material allegation of the election petitioner and the evidence given in
support of it on each of these issues. Out of these the election petitioner, in
his cross appeal No. 909 of 1975, has questioned the findings of the High
Court only on issues Nos. 2. 4, 6, 7 and 9 set out above. Issues Nos. 5 and
8 and 10, decided in favour of the election petitioner, were technical and are
immaterial now. It will be noticed that the additional issue No. 1. due to
some error or oversight, is an exact and unnecessary repetition of the initial
issue No. 1 Additional issues numbered 2 and 3 are connected with and
subsidiaries of the initially framed issues numbered 1 and 3.
402. The learned trial Judge had accepted the election petitioner's case on
the material issues numbered 1 and 3 of the initially framed issues, and on
the overlapping and subsidiary additional issues 1, 2 and 3. He was of
opinion that Shri Yashpal Kapur, a Central Government servant and a
Gazetted Officer of the rank of an Under-Secretary, deputed to serve in the
Prime Minister's Secretariat as an Officer on Special Duty, had held his post
until 25-1-1971. when his resignation, tendered on 13-1-1971, was
accepted by the President of India with effect from 14-1-1971, by means of
a notification published on 6-2-1971. Consequently, the learned Judge set
aside the election of the original respondent after holding that she was
guilty of a "corrupt practice", as defined by Section 123(7) of the Act. on
each of two grounds : firstly, that she must be deemed to have obtained the
help of Shri Yashpal Kapur. in the furtherance of her election, before he had
ceased to be a Gazetted Officer in Government service, and after the
original respondent had first held herself out, on 29-12-1970, as a candidate
at the forthcoming election from the Rae Bareli constituency by answering in
the negative a question put to her at & Press Conference in New Delhi
inquiring whether she had decided to change her constituency from Rae
Bareily in U.P. to Gurgaon in Haryana; and, secondly, that she must be
deemed to have obtained the help of officials of the State of U.P. who got
rostrums constructed for her election speeches and electricity provided and
arrangements made for loudspeakers. The learned Judge declared her to be
disqualified under Section 8A of the Act from holding her office for a period
of six years from the date of his order dated 12-6-1975. I deliberately
employ the word "deemed" to describe the nature of the findings of the trial
Judge on both these questions because the learned Judge had himself
indicated that they were inferences based entirely on circumstantial and not
on any direct evidence whatsoever of any instructions issued either by the
original respondent or by her election agent during the period following 29-
12-1970. Election Appeal No. 881 of 1975 was filed against decisions on
these two questions and consequential orders of the learned trial Judge.
403. The law. as found in the Act of 1951 did not. unlike the English Act of
1949, make a distinction between corrupt practices and illegal practices.
Section 123(7), as it has stood unamended, enume rates, as the last of the
7 classes of corrupt practice, as follows:
Section 123(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting
to obtain or procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other
person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent, any
assistance other than the giving of vote for the furtherance of the
prospects of that candidate's election, from any person in the
service of the Government and belonging to any of the following
classes, namely:
(a) gazetted officers;
(b) stipendiary judges and magis(c) members of the armed
forces of the Union;
(d) members of the .police forces;
(e) excise officers;
(f) & (g) xx xx xx
Explanation.- (1) In this section the expression 'agent'
includes an election agent, a polling agent and any person
who is held to have acted as an agent in connection with
the election with the consent of the candidate.
(2) For the purposes of Clause (7), a person shall be
deemed to assist in the furtherance of the prospects of a
candidate's election if he acts as an election agent of that
candidate.
404. It is clear that "the obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to
obtain or procure" had to take place either by a candidate or by his agent or
by somebody "with the consent of the candidate or his election agent". Until
the candidate had appointed an election agent, the action of any other
person could not constitute him automatically an agent so that he may by
doing something voluntarily, succeed in making the candidate vicariously
liable for his own actions whether he was or was not a gazetted officer at
the time when he committed the act complained of. The question of
obtaining assistance through "an agent" or "other person with the consent
of a candidate or his election agent" could only arise where such a case of
obtaining assistance indirectly through others is set up but not otherwise.
405. On issue No. 1, the case set up in paragraph 5 of the petition is:
Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi obtained and procured the assistance of
the said Shri Yashpal Kapur for the furtherance of prospects of her
election from the constituency aforesaid inasmuch as the said Shri
Yashpal Kapur was a Gazetted Officer in the service of Government
of India when his assistance was obtained and pro cured The said
Shri Yashpal Kapur on the direction of Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi
organized the electioneering work for her in the constituency during
the period commencing from 27-12-1970....
It is a case of liability resulting from an alleged "direction" given by Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi herself to Shri Kapur. No case of procurement of
assistance of Shri Kapur through a third person is set up although the word
".procured" is mechanically lifted from Section 123(7) and used. On issue
No. 3, the case set up in para. 9 of the petition is that both Smt. Indira
Gandhi and her election agent, Shri Kapur. "obtained and procured" the
assistance of Govt. Officers, but no directions or orders given by anyone are
mentioned there. Issue No. 1 shows that the case which was put in issue
and went on trial was whether the original respondent had herself issued
some direction to Shri Kapur. Issue No. 3 shows that what was in issue here
was whether the Government officers mentioned there rendered the
assistance indicated' there "at the instance" of the original respondent or
her election agent. The discussion of evidence and findings of the learned
Judge, particularly on issue No. 1, show that the learned Judge had almost
made out a new case for the election petitioner and accepted it. This was,
,on issue No. 1, whether Shri Kapur had done some acts in circumstances
which justify the inference that he was constituted a de facto agent of the
Prime Minister even before he was appointed her election agent on 1-2-
1971, and on issue No. 3, whether sending round of certain tour
programmes with the approval of the Prime Minister, in the background of
certain long standing instructions of the Comptroller and Auditor General,
read with letters sent by the Government of India, as long ago as 12-1-
1959, and 19-11-1969. amounted to "implied" directions by the Prime
Minister or her election agent to the State Government to provide the
facilities the Govt. officials gave. Now, whenever a case of a liability by
"implication", where there is such a species of liability in law comparable to
a criminal liability, is to be fastened upon an individual, the prosecutor is to
be expected, as a part of an elementary duty to give fair notice and a fair
opportunity to meet what the individual has really to be made liable for.
either because of some act or omission of the individual concerned, or, even
more so, for that of an agent or another person for which there may be
some sort of vicarious liability, from facts showing consent or agency, to
give full particulars of circumstances from which such implications or
vicarious liabilities may arise. I do not find that this was done here.
406. The law must lay down a duty to prevent, by taking some steps which
are not taken, before a person is held liable for an omission. And, there is a
difference between omission to prevent the doing of something and actual
consent to the doing of it. I do not find, in the petition, any case of a liability
from omissions to do something set up, obviously because the law does not
impose upon the candidate the duty to prevent the giving of voluntary
assistance by others whether officials or not. Nor is there anywhere in the
petition a case of procurement by consenting to aid obtained through others
It has to be remembered that on the language of Section 123(7) a liability is
not created by merely not rejecting voluntarily given aid. The candidate may
not often be aware of the voluntarily given assistance so as to be able to
reject it. A case of consent which can be legally set up is only one of
consenting to active obtaining or procurement by an agent or by some other
person who becomes, for the purpose of the specific aid given and
consented to, ordinarily prior to obtaining it as good as an agent employed
by the candidate.
407. On the terms of Section 123(7) the following three types of cases of
actual obtaining of assistance, as distinguished from abetment or
attempting to obtain it, can be legally set up either exclusively, or.
alternatively, against a candidate; firstly, a direct obtaining of it by the act of
the candidate himself : secondly, an indirect or vicarious procurement of it
by the acts of a duly constituted agent; and, thirdly, an indirect or vicarious
procurement of it by the acts of a person who, though not a duly constituted
agent, becomes constructively an agent, for the purpose of some particular
aid obtained, because it was assented to By the candidate at a time which
must, ordinarily be before the aid is given, so that the person through whom
assistance is obtained is a constructive agent for this particular aid at the
time when it is given. The term procurement should, strictly speaking, apply
only in the last two types of cases. A reference to Section 100(1)(b) further
emphasises the position that a corrupt practice for which the High Court is
to declare an election void must have been committed either "by a returned
candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of
the returned candidate or his election agent". A case falling under Section
100(1)(d)(ii) of "a corrupt practice committed in the interests of a candidate
by an agent other than his election agent" is very different and postulates. :
firstly, a corrupt practice which can be committed only by an agent; and.
secondly, the existence of such an agent. A case falling under Section
100(1)(d) requires also proof of the further fact that the result of the
election was materially affected by the corrupt practice.
408. As I read the petition. I find only the first of the three types of cases
mentioned above set up exclusively on issue No. 1 because there are no
particulars there which could apply to the other two types of cases.
Obviously, the case set up was not of a corrupt practice by some act of a
person to which the candidate became a party by merely giving consent in
which case the circumstances from which the consent was to be inferred had
to be indicated. It was a case of a direction given by the Prime Minister
herself to Shri Kapur who, it had to be presumed for the purposes of such a
case, would not have given the aid if the direction or order was not there.
This deliberately given "direction" had to be proved on the case set up. On
issue No. 3, the petition mentions only what was obtained, that is to say,
the aid of particular officers and the form it took; but. what caused that aid
to be given or the means adopted to get it were not set up there. I think
these distinctions should have been borne in mind. I shall indicate below
how the learned Judge, in dealing with a case of the first type only falling
under Section 100(1)(b) of the Act, found in issue No. I, mixed up facts
which could, strictly speaking, be relevant only in considering a case of one
of the other two types. And, in deciding issue No. 3. what really and quite
naturally flowed from and was the well understood appurtenant of the office
of a Prime Minister, and, indeed, absolutely necessary for the due protection
of the fife and freedom of movement of the holder of that high office was
mistaken by the learned Judge to be the result of some kind of assumed
solicitation for aid. What the learned Judge entirely missed was that it is the
act of solicitation for the aid of the officials mentioned in Section 123(7),
whether successful or not, and not the mere fact that certain advantages
flow quite naturally and conventionally from the occupation of an office,
without any solicitation, or the mere fact that some assistance is voluntarily
given by someone to an election campaign which is penalised by the
provision.
409. The definition given above in Section 123(7) meant, on an ordinary
and natural' interpretation of words used, . that the corrupt practice defined
there could not be committed by any person before there was a ''candidate"
for an election. Hence, it became necessary to examine the definition of a
"candidate" found in Section 79(b) which laid down:
79. In this part and in parts VII and VIII, unless the context
otherwise re quires,
(b) 'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have
been duly nominated as a candidate at any election, and any such
person shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the time
when, with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out as
a prospective candidate.
410. Section 123, defining corrupt practices, is found in Part VII of the Act.
therefore, the definition of candidate in Section 79, as it originally stood,
was sought to be applied by the Trial Court to determine whether the
original . respondent could have committed a corrupt practice at the time of
the alleged commission of it. Before, however, I deal with that question, it is
necessary to examine what "obtaining, or procuring or abetting or
attempting" meant in the light of the law laid down repeatedly by this Court
in cases of alleged corrupt practices.
411. The logical consequence of placing a charge of corrupt practice on the
same footing as a criminal charge is obligation to interpret the words which
define it strictly and narrowly. Indeed, any natural and ordinary
interpretation on the words "obtaining or procuring or abetting or
attempting" must carry with it the imperative requirement that the
candidate concerned or his agent must have intentionally done an act which
has the effect contemplated by Section 123(7). In other words, a "mens
rea" or a guilty mind as well as an "actus reus" or a wrongful act must
concur to produce the result contemplated by law. So far as election
expenses are' concerned, it is possible to conceive that even an
unintentional result (i.e. expenses "incurred" exceeding the prescribed limit)
may be enough so that a duty to prevent this result may be there in law.
But. Section 123(7) requires actual intended acts of "obtaining" or
"procuring" or attempting or abetting. For Section 123(7) results are
immaterial.
412. In the case before us, the petition contains, as I have indicated above,
the necessary averment of a deliberate direction by the original respondent
herself, so far as issue No. 1 is concerned and of "obtaining" and "procuring"
as regards issue No. 3. These are enough to denote the ingredients of a
mens rea. But, one will search the evidence in vain for any indication of a
mens rea or guilty intent on the part of the original respondent or of her
election agent when she had appointed one. As regards both issues 1 and 3,
the learned Judge seemed to think that Section 123(7) creates what is
called an "absolute statutory liability", which does not require a mens rea,
although, in dealing with issue No. 2. he had himself, after citing the
necessary authorities, taken the view that a mens rea was also essential. He
had himself, in dealing with issue No. 2, distinguished Dr. Y. S. Parmar v.
Hira Singh, AIR 4959 SC 244 a decision with whose ratio decidendi I have
never, with due respect, felt happy in so far as it meant that 'a charge of
corrupt practice under Section 123(7) does not require proof of mens rea. It
was decided on the strength of a statutory presumption. There were other
decisions of the Supreme Court under earlier law showing that mere
appointment of a Government servant as a polling agent could not be
corrupt practice (See : Satya Dev v. Padam Dev, MANU/SC/0102/1954 : [1955]1SCR549 , Mahendra Kumar v. Vidyavati MANU/SC/0147/1954 : AIR1956SC315 . Dr. Parmar's case (supra) had necessitated an amendment
in Clause (2) of Explanation 1 of Section 123(7) of the Act so that a
Government servant, by merely acting as & polling agent, could not be
"deemed" to have so. acted as to further the prospects of a candidate's
election. The learned Judge had relied in his findings on issue No. 2 on Babu
Bhai Vallabh Das Gandhi v. Pilloo Homi Mody (1971) 36 ELR 108;pp. 123-
124 (Guj) and Haji Abdul Wahid v. B.V. Keskar. (1960) 21 Ele LR 409. But,
when he came to issue No. 3 and, right at the end of his judgment, to issue
No. 1, he appears to have overlooked the basic requirements of a mens rea
and an actus reus, or in any case, if he had these requirements in view, he
erred in assuming that they existed here. I think he gravely erred in holding
that some "actus reus" of the original respondent lay buried beneath
circumstances which seem to me to really point in the opposite direction.
Some times, even if direct evidence is lacking, circumstantial evidence,
which inscape ably points to a particular conclusion, may be even better.
But. where is that evidence here? I fail to see it and none was pointed out to
us.
413. Let me here quote the exact language used by the Trial Judge himself
in giving his findings on the first part (relating to 27-12-1970 to 13-1-1971)
of issue No. 1 of the "first set" of issues combined with the issue No. 1 of
the additional issues, both issues, for some inexplicable reason, being
identically worded. The learned Judge said:
Learned Counsel for the respondent then urged that even accepting
that Shri Yashpal Kapur delivered a speech at Munshiganj on 7th
January, 1971 and that he canvassed support for the respondent in
that speech, he was not an election agent on that date, and there is
no evidence of the fact that he had been instructed to do so by the
respondent No. 1. Learned Counsel stressed that, consequently it
should not be held on that basis that the respondent No. 1 obtained
or procured the assistance of Shri Yashpal Kapur for the furtherance
of her election prospects.
I have given my careful consideration to this argument as well, but
I regret my inability to accept the same. As also stated earlier, Shri
Yashpal Kapur was occupying a position of trust and confidence with
the respondent No. 1 since quite a long time. During the period in
question he was Officer on Special Duty in the respondent No. 1's
Secretariat. In 1967 he had resigned from his post for the sake of
respondent No. 1 to be able to do her election work in the
constituency. After that was done, he was taken back in the
respondent's Secretariat as Officer on Special Duty. Respondent No.
1 held herself out as a candidate on 29th December, 1970. On 5th
of January, 1971 Raja Dinesh Singh was sent to the constituency.
On 7th of January, 1971 Shri Yashpal Kapur visited Rae Bareli. and.
on the own admission of respondent No. 1, he did so with previous
notice to the respondent No. 1. The subsequent events also appear
to be material, for, according to Shri Yashpal Kapur, immediately on
return from Rae Bareli he held a talk with the respondent No. 1 on
9th or 10th of January. 1971, on 13th January he again resigned
from the post and the same day set out. once again for the
constituency of the respondent No. .1. It was again he who was
ultimately appointed election agent for the respondent No. 1. It
may be added that it was not possible to adduce any direct
evidence on the point whether the respondent No. 1 instructed Shri
Yashpal Kapur to go to Rae Bareli on 7th January 1971 for any
election work. That can be inferred only on the basis of the
surrounding circumstances. I have already mentioned those
circumstances above and to my mind the only inference that can be
drawn on the basis of those circumstances is that the respondent
No. 1 went to Rae Bareli on the aforesaid date under instruction of
the respondent No. 1 for doing preliminary work pertaining to her
election.
To sum, therefore, it is satisfactorily proved that the respondent No.
1 during the period ending on 13th January, 1971
obtained/procured the assistance of Sri Yashpal Kapur, a Gazetted
Officer in the Government of India for the furtherance of her
election prospects, inasmuch as Shri Yashpal Kapur was made to go
to Rae Bareli on 7-1-1971 and deliver a speech at Shaheed Mela in
Munshiganj canvassing support for her candidature.
414. Now, it is a well settled rule repeatedly laid down by this Court, that
allegations of corrupt practice in the course of an election must be judged
by the same standards as a criminal charge. And, no rule of evidence, in
judging guilt on a criminal charge, is more firmly rooted than that no
charge, resting on circumstantial evidence, could be held to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt unless the chain of circumstances is so complete
and so connected with the charge that it leaves no other reasonable
hypothesis open for the Court to adopt except that the offender had
committed the offence alleged (See : e.g. Smt. Om Praha Jain v. Charan Das, MANU/SC/0305/1975 : AIR1975SC1417 . 415. The learned Judge dealt with evidence on issue No. 1 relating to the
activities of Shri Yashpal Kapur by dividing it into three periods : (1) from
27-12-1970 to 13-1-1971. when Shri Kapur had not resigned from Govt.
service : (2) from 14-1-1971 to 25-1-1971, the period after Shri Kapur's
resignation upto its acceptance by the President of India evidenced by a
notification dated 25-1-1971; (3) from 26-1-1971 to 6-2-1.971, the period
after the acceptance of Shri Kapur's resignation and upto the date of the
publication of it in the Official Gazette The learned Judge considered only
the first two periods material as he held the activities in the third period to
be above board because Shri Kapur was free to do what he liked in this
period. Hence, the fact that the original respondent appointed Shri Kapur
her election agent on 1-2 1971 made no difference to the result in the third
period. But, we will find that a very glaring feature of the findings relating to
the first two periods is that the original respondent is held vicariously
responsible without anything beyond the activities of Shri Yashpal Kapur and
his position as an Officer on Special Duty in the Prime Minister's Secretariat
to justify the inference that he had an express or implied authorisation on
direction from the Prime Minister to do anything in general or in particular
on her behalf for her election.
416. Let us take the first period. What was required to be approved, beyond
all reasonable doubt from the evidence on record on this part of the case,
was that Shri Yashpal Kapur had been instructed or directed by the original
respondent to render the help if any, that he did give by the speech he was
alleged to have made at a fair at Shaheed Mela (Martyrs' fair) at Munshiganj
in Rae Bareli on 7-1-1971, canvassing support for the original respondent's
election-an allegation which Shri Yashpal Kapur had denied in so far as any
mention of the original respondent's candidature is concerned. Shri Kapur
admitted that he had gone there with Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, a former
Minister of the Central Government, but said that he had only, when called
upon to do so. paid his tribute to the memory of the martyrs.
417. The learned Judge held that the recollection of Shri Yashpal Kapur
about what he said at the Shaheed Mela on 7-1-1971 was less reliable than
the statement of Shri Vidya Shankar Yadav (P.W. 43), an Advocate belonging
to an opposition party, supported by his political co-worker. Nankau Yadav
(P.W. 28)- a witness who, in his transparent anxiety to appear truthful, went
so far as to make the absurd assertion that he had not told anyone, before
he appeared in the witness box. that he had attended the Shaheed Mela on
7-1-1971. and who could not remember either the date of his marriage or
the dates of births of his children but asserted that he had noted 7-1-1971
without even having ever talked on any previous occasion to anyone about
this date if he is to be believed- and, by Shri R. K. Dixit (P.W. 31), a joint
editor of a newspaper who claimed to be present on the occasion, and who,
while reporting other facts and reasons in his newspaper for believing that
the original respondent will stand from the Rae Bareily constituency, had not
mentioned what he claimed, in the witness box to have heard Shri Yashipal
Kapur himself say at the Mela. Obviously, both these witnesses, if they were
not committing perjury, did not have good memories on their own
admissions. But, the learned Judge had believed them quite unhesitatingly
although the meeting at Shaheed Mela, addressed by Shri Yashpal Kapur,
had not even been given any prominence in the pleadings by being at least
specifically mentioned in the petition.
418. The learned Judge disbelieved the evidence of the original respon
dent's witness Shri Sarju Prasad (R.W. 12), the Headmaster of a School,
who had denied that he ever accompanied Shri Nankau (P.W. 28) to the
Shaheed Mela as claimed by Nankau. The ground for holding that Shri Sarju
Prasad must be de posing falsely appears to me to be very unfair both to
Shri Sarju Prasad and Shri Gaya Prasad Shukla, a Congressman, who was
suspected, without the slightest foundation in evidence, of having induced
Shri Sarju Prasad to give perjured evidence simply because Shri Gaya
Prasad, who did not even appear as a witness, was a member of the
Congress (R) party and was once connected with the School in which Shri
Sarju Prasad served. The learned Judge said:
It is quite likely that once Nankau had conceded in cross-
examination that Sarju Prasad had accompanied him to the
Shaheed Mela, pressure was brought to bear on Sarju Prasad (R.W.
12) by Gaya Prasad Shukla in order to make him appear as a
witness in the case and give evidence to contradict the testimony of
Nankau. It is, true that in his re-examination Sarju Prasad (R.W.
12) admitted that on the date on which he was examined as a
witness in the case the school was being run by the Government
under the control of the District Basic Education Officer. However,
the association that Gaya Prasad Shukla had with the Pathshala in
his capacity as Adhyaksha, and consequently with Sarju Prasad,
who was a teacher in that Pathshala. could not have been wiped off
overnight merely because the school was taken over by the
Government to be run under its own officers.
419. The reasons given by the learned Judge for holding that it was
"abundantly clear" that Shri Ram Pal (R.W. 13), another witness of Smt.
Gandhi was "also not a truthful witness", were:
Now, since Ramesh Chand Shukla Advocate is a resident of the
same village where Ram Pal resided, and since he was an important
worker for the respondent No. 1 during the election and was also
her Pairokar at some stage, the possibility of Ram Pal having been
pressurised by Shri Ramesh Chand Shukla cannot be excluded.
Together with it there is also the fact that Shri Gaya Prasad Shukla,
another important worker of the respondent No. 1, happened to be
the Adhyaksha of the Zila Parishad during the period the wit ness
was examined in the case. It is a matter of common knowledge that
the Adhyaksha of the Zila Parishad always wields influence in the
rural areas. It will not be out of place to add that when it was put to
Ram Pal in cross-examination as to which party did Sri Ramesh
Chand Shukla belong, he pleaded ignorance about it. It cannot be
accepted for any moment that even though Shri Shukla resided in
the village in which this witness resided, and even though Shri
Shukla was such a prominent worker of the Congress party, Ram
Pal would not have known about it.
420. I do not know how, when workers of the Congress party were divided
into two camps and had been changing sides, from time to time, ignorance
of a worker's precise party loyalties meant that Ram Pal was untruthful. If
mere possibilities of being "pressurised" or biased were enough to tar a
witness as untruthful, it is difficult to see how or why the witnesses of the
election petitioner, on whom lay the primary burden of proof, could escape
similar treatment. V.S. Yadav, was, no doubt, an Advocate. But, he was not
even paying Income-tax. He felt free, on a working day in Courts, to go to
the Mela. He was enthusiastic enough as a member of an opposition party to
object, according to himself, to Shri Yashpal Kapur bringing in the
candidature of the original respondent even at a meeting which, according
to him, consisted mostly of Congress (R) sympathisers. Shri Yashpal Kapur
was not so ignorant or inexperienced in election matters and could not be
assumed, without any evidence to support the assumption, to be so
imprudent as to make a speech when he would know that, as he was still a
Government servant, this would be misinterpreted.
421. Let us, for the sake of argument, assume that Shri Yashpal Kapur had
been over-powered by such a desire to exhibit an excessive zeal, which got
the better of his prudence that he, believing that a publicly made guesture
of his loyalty was needed on this particular occasion, cast all caution to the
winds and, while paying the tribute he was called upon to pay to the
memory of the martyrs, suddenly decided to jump into the electoral fray by
making an appeal at the martyrs' mela to support Smt. Indira Gandhi, as
though the speeches of all those local leaders who. in addition to Shri
Gulzarilal Nanda, a former Minister are said to have spoken there to the
same effect, were not enough. What follows? It is here that we find the
weakest link in the misty and fanciful chain of the learn-, ed Judge's logic.
Where was the evidence that, whatever else Shri.Yashpal Kapur may or may
not have been supposed to do on his visit to Rae Bareli, this particular piece
of "frolic", a term used by law relating to scope of authority, carried the
"direction" of Smt. Indira Gandhi herself behind it? Indeed, there is not only
not a jot of evidence to suggest that Shri Yashpal Kapur was actually asked
by Smt. Gandhi to go to Rae Bareli to do anything for her election on this
visit, but there is ample absolutely unshaken evidence of Shri Yashpal Kapur
to the contrary, supported by the evidence of the Prime Minister herself,
which the learned trial Judge had, for some reason, entirely ignored. In any
case, it is utterly unthinkable that the Prime Minister herself could have
conceivably authorised Shri Kapur to go to Munshiganj and make a public
speech, while he was still a Government servant, to support her
candidature. And, if he had no authority from her either to act generally or
to do any particular act on her behalf, how could each and every action of
Shri Kapur possibly make the Prime Minister legally liable vicariously for it?
422. The learned Judge, as is evident, from his summary of evidence and
conclusions, relied on circumstantial evidence only. But, in order that the
circumstances should have a conclusive effect, so as to exclude any
reasonable hypothesis except that of guilt, they had to point in one direction
only and in no other. What is the position that emerges from a consideration
of the circumstances found and detailed by the learned Judge himself? It
was held that Shri Yashpal Kapur was occupying a position of trust and
confidence with the original respondent for quite a long time. Indeed, his
evidence shows that he was so attached to the family of the original
respondent and the political and national causes its members had
represented that he was just the type of person who could, even without the
slightest suggestion on the part of the original respondent, voluntarily taken
upon himself the duty to do whatever he could do in his private capacity to
help her return at the election. Indeed, his private capacity, as a person
attached to the family of the original respondent and to the causes
espoused by its members, could very well be considered more important by
him than his Government service. And, this is exactly what the findings
given by the learned Judge relating to services rendered by Shri Yashpal
Kapur at the previous elections of the original respondent, showing how he
had resigned his post on a previous occasion, to help in her election,
indicated.
423. In the passage from the judgment, quoted above, the learned Judge
draws an inference of a previous instruction, from the Prime Minister to Shri
Kapur, to say what he is alleged to have said in a speech, because, inter
alia, Shri Kapur met the Prime Minister on his return from Rae Bareli; Again,
the necessary inference of a previous intimation by Shri Kapur to the Prime
Minister of his intention to visit Rae Bareli, could not be that there was any
authority or direction given by the Prime Minister to Shri Kapur to do or to
say anything on her behalf. All this would lie in the realm of pure conjecture
and suspicion. It left other possible and more reasonable inferences wide
open.
424. The learned Judge had himself held, so far as use of rostrums is
concerned, that the Prime Minister sheds her personality, as the holder of
her office, and assumes the role of a mere candidate as soon as she ascends
a platform to make an election speech. But, when the learned Judge deals
with the action of Shri Kapur, in making a speech from a platform at a
martyrs' mela. because Shri Kapur is called upon to pay his tribute to the
martyrs, he holds that not only must the capacity of a Govt. servant
unshakably stick to him, but that Shri Kapur must have been authorised by
the Prime Minister herself knowing, as she did, that he was a Govt., servant
to go and make a public speech at the Mela and canvass for votes for her. I
do not think that we can indulge in a flight of fancy which could be described
as "flamboyant.
425. The uncontroverted evidence of Shri Kapur which had been ignored by
the trial Judge was that it was the special business of this witness, as an
officer on Special Duty in the Prime Minister's Secretariat, in his own words,
"to deal with the representations received from public and other works of
semi-political nature." It is difficult to understand how the occupant of such
a difficult and responsible office as that of the Prime Minister of the
numerically largest democracy in the world can possibly discharge his or her
duties towards the public satisfactorily without the aid of such officers.
Naturally, as the Prime Minister was contemplating standing for election
from the Rae Bareli constituency, it would not be outside the scope of the
duties of such an officer to attend especially to the complaints and
representations from Rae Bareli. He stated that Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, who
was then the Railway Minister, had received some representations from the
Rae Bareli. He also said that he had. from time to time, forwarded some
representations to Shri Gulzarilal Nanda. who had asked him to accompany
him to Rae Bareli. therefore, apparently without being asked by the Prime
Minister, but, after informing her of his intention to go with Shri Gulzarilal
Nanda the witness had. in the course of the performance of duties especially
assigned to him since his appointment, visited Rae Bareli in the company of
Shri Gulzarilal Nanda. This could not be outside the scope of his duties.
426. Again, without any contradiction from any evidence whatsoever, his
statement, unquestioned also in cross-examination, was that the Prime
Minister did not, at any time, ask him, in his own words "either directly or
indirectly to do anything pertaining to her election". The Prime Minister's
replies to interrogatories served upon her show that she had no personal
knowledge of what Shri Kapur did at Rae Bareli before he was appointed her
election agent. It is also apparent from the evidence of this witness and of
the Prime Minister herself that, when he expressed his desire on 9th or 10th
January. 1971, to the Prime Minister to resign from his post as Officer on
Special Duty, she asked him to think over the matter as this would mean
that he could not return to his post. He had earlier said that this decision
was taken with a view to do work for the public in general and the Congress
party in particular as he wanted to enter public life. It is clear that the Prime
Minister had left the decision entirely to the free will and option of Shri
Kapur who had been asked to ponder over it carefully. When Shri Kapur had
informed the Prime Minister again on 13-1-1971 that he had reached his,
final decision, after due consideration, to resign from his post so as to be
able to do public work, as he had political ambitions, she had agreed to it
and had asked him to see Shri P.N. Haksar, who was Incharge of the Prime
Minister's Secretariat. He informed Shri P. N. Haksar about this decision on
the telephone and then met him an hour later on 13-1-1971 to submit his
letter of resignation. Shri Haksar, relying upon Rule 3 of the Govt., of India
Transaction of Business Rules, had orally accepted this resignation, as the
head of the Prime Minister's Secretariat. He told Shri Kapur that he was a
free man. Naturally, the necessary notification, showing that Shri Kapur was
relieved of his office with effect from 14-1-1971, was to follow.
427. The statement of Shri Kapur, supported by those of the Prime Minister
and Shri P.N. Haksar, had been accepted by the trial Court as correct so far
as tender of this resignation and its acceptance, in all the stages, followed
by the notification in the Gazette went. The learned Judge held that the
President gave his assent on 25-1-1971. Shri Kapur's letter of resignation
must have been duly forwarded and was acted upon. This was the learned
Judge's finding. Shri Kapur did not work in the Prime Minister's Secretariat
after 13-1-1971 and he drew no salary as a Govt., servant after that date.
The notification in the Gazette could not, according to rules, take place until
Shri Kapur had handed over charge. He signed and completed the necessary
papers relating to relinquishment of the charge of his office on 13-1-1971,
but he put the date 14-1-1971 under his signature on the document
evidencing a formal handing over of charge as it was to take effect from that
date. The trial Court held that the resignation of Shri Kapur would be
effective from 25-1-1971 notwithstanding the fact that his request to be
relieved from office, with effect from 14-1-1971, had been accepted and
acted upon immediately by Shri P. N. Haksar as the official head of the
Prime Minister's Secretariat. The papers were sent to the Secretariat of the
President of India for completion of formalities. The formal Presidential
sanction having been obtained, the notification-dated 25-1-1971, declaring
the resignation of Shri Kapur to be effective from 14-1-1971. was published on 6-2-1971. 428. On the facts stated above there could be no doubt whatsoever that
Shri Kapur was not asked to do anything at all in connection with her
election by the Prime Minister herself, but he had decided to take interest in
it voluntarily as he had some political ambitions : and, therefore he had
asked the Prime Minister to be relieved of his office in her Secretariat with
effect from 14-1-1971. It is unfortunate that the learned Judge thought that
there was something almost sinister in Shri Kapur taking such interest in the
election or in hoping to enter political life through absolutely legitimate
means. There is not the slightest reason for anyone who fairly examines the
evidence of Shri Kapur, supported by that of the Prime Minister and Shri P.N.
Haksar, to doubt the motives or the veracity of Shri Kapur on this point. He
frankly stated that his ambition was to enter political life. In any case, the
motives of Shri Kapur were not on trial. If such assistance as he may have
rendered was entirely voluntary, without any request or solicitation from the
Prime Minister, I do not see how, on the view of the correct legal position
stated above, it made any difference to the result even if Shri Kapur had
continued to be a Government servant upto 25-11-1971.
429. Shri P.N. Haksar- was aware of and cited the applicable rule for a
resignation by a temporary Government servant, as Shri Kapur was, and
staled also the practice followed, in his experience, in such cases. He.
presumably thought that the resignation was effective from 14-1-1971. Shri
Kapur also acted upon that assumption and in that belief.; The Prime
Minister, who could not be expected to examine suo motu the question :
whether Shri P.N. Haksar and Shri Kapur were right in their beliefs about the
effectiveness of the resignation, assumed that everything was alright. In
any case, there could not possibly, on these facts, be any mens rea on her
part.
430. The learned Judge having accepted, on the unimpeachable evidence of
the date of notification of 25-1-1971 published in the Official Gazette on 6-
2-1971, that Shri Kapur must have handed in his resignation in a letter of
13-1-1971, it is very difficult to see how one could possibly doubt the
correctness of the statement of Shri P.N. Haksar that, as the Head of the
Prime Minister's Secretariat he had accepted the resignation orally and
forwarded it on for necessary action. The resignation had taken place with
the consent of the Prime Minister. It is inconceivable, in the circumstances,
that Shri P. N. Haksar would not have, as the Head of the Department in
which Shri Kapur was working, agreed to relieve him of his duties by telling
him that he was a free man, and, thereby, accepted his resignation. He.
very honestly, stated that he does not remember whether he wrote anything
on the margin of that letter. He must have made so many indorsements on
so-many letters and documents that it was expecting the impossible to hold
that he must remember what he wrote on every one of them. The only
other ground given by the learned Judge for doubting the correctness of this
version, which completely accords with the natural and ordinary course of
official business, was that the additional written statement, filed a year after
the original written statement, mentions this fact for the first time. It seems
to me that he learned Judge was carrying his suspicions to excessive
lengths. The real question involved was the legal effect of the facts accepted
by the learned Judge to be correct. These were : firstly, that such a letter of
resignation was handed in on 13-1-1971 by Shri Kapur to Shri Haksar
asking to be allowed to resign with effect from 14-1-1971; and, secondly,
this very request was accepted by the President of India and incorporated in
a notification dated 25-1-1971.
431. The learned Judge had found Shri P.N. Haksar's statement, that such
an oral acceptance, followed by the necessary notification afterwards, was
'.'rather interesting", and, that the resignation could not be effective until
25-1-1971. the date of drafting the notification. But, what the learned Judge
completely over looked was that the notification itself made the resignation
effective from 14-1-1971, the date from which Shri Kapur had neither
worked in the Prime Minister's Secretariat nor drawn any salary. There was
no plea anywhere, and there is no express finding on it. that the President's
notification itself, which made the resignation effective from 14-1-1971, was
invalid to the extent that it purported to give any retrospective effect to the
resignation, in the sense that it made it effective from a date prior to its
actual acceptance. The fact that it is made effective from 14-1-1971 shows
that the letter must have reached the President's Secretariat with the
request that ; this should be done. And. in the ordinary course of business,
the head of the office concerned makes his indorsement on such letters.
432. The learned Judge had relied on Rule 5 of the Central civil Services
(Temporary Service) Rules, 1949, which runs as follows:
5 (a) The service of a temporary Government servant who is not in
quasi-permanent service shall be liable to termination at any time
by notice in writing given either by the Government servant to the
appointing authority or by the appointing authority to the
Government servant.
(b) The period of such notice shall be one month, unless otherwise
agreed to by the Government and by the Government servant:
Provided that the service of any such Government servant
may be terminated forthwith by payment to him of a sum
equivalent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for the
period of the notice or as the case may be, for the period
by which such notice falls short of one month or any
agreed longer period.
433. The learned Judge had referred to Halsbury's Laws of England. Vol. V
(Simond's Edn.), p. 61. where it was laid down that in a "corporation
created by Statute for the discharge of public functions a member may not
have an absolute right to resign at will, be cause the law may cast a duty
upon the person elected to a public office to act in that office in public
interest." He also referred to an American case. Edwards M. Edwards v.
United States (1880) 26 L Ed 314 to the effect that only the appointing
authority could have accepted the resignation of an occupant of a public
office, and that, under the special provisions of the law, the holder of such
an office could be subjected to a penalty for a wrongful refusal to perform
the duties of his office. The desire or wish of the holder of the office had to
give place to public interest in such special cases. It is clear that the cases
cited could have no relevance whatsoever for an interpretation of Rule 5 set
out above.
434. The learned Judge had then relied upon Raj Kumar v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0180/1968 : (1970)ILLJ13SC where this Court held that
"normally, and, in the absence of any law or rule governing the conditions of
his service to the contrary, it will not be open to the public servant to
withdraw his resignation after it is accepted by the appropriate authority." In
that case, there was a dispute between the Government servant and the
Union of India on the question whether the Government servant concerned
would withdraw his resignation after it was accepted. It was held that he
could not. It was not a case of an agreement between the parties at all as to
the date from which the resignation could effectively terminate service. It is
true that in Raj Narain v. Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi MANU/SC/0366/1972 :
[1972]3SCR841 when this very matter came up to this Court to decide
whether an issue should be struck on it, this Court had sent back the matter
to the High Court after holding that an issue should be framed to decide
when Shri Kapur's resignation became effective and that this question "will
have to be examined with reference to his conditions of service." Now it is
clear from the rule itself, that a condition of Shri Kapur's service was that
the Government and the Government servant could dispense with the Period
of notice if it was mutually agreed upon to do that. Rule 5(b) makes that
abundantly clear. The learned Judge, for some reason, completely
overlooked this aspect.
435. Neither the Government nor the Government servant is in a worse
position than an ordinary master or servant on a matter governed by
contract. In fact, Article 310 makes it clear that, in such a case, the tenure
of office of a Central Government servant is "during the pleasure of the
President". In the instant case, the President's pleasure was contained in the
notification dated 25-1-1971 showing that the President had accepted the
resignation of Shri Kapur with effect from the forenoon of 14-1-1971. And,
this is what Shri Kapur himself wanted. Hence, there is no difficulty at all in
accepting the correctness of a resignation effective from the date which both
parties to the contract, on patent facts, had agreed to. No rights of an
innocent 3rd party were either involved or affected by such an acceptance of
the resignation from the date immediately after the date on which Shri
Kapur had tendered his resignation. That, as already pointed out was also
the date after which he had ceased to work or draw his salary. It is
inconceivable that the law should thrust the status of a Government servant
upon one who does not want it, particularly when the Government also does
not, in public interest, refuse to relieve him by making him stick to any
terms to the contrary in his contract. Our law, on this point, is not so
monstrous. The position accepted by the learned Judge appears to me to be
quite indefensible. However, there was an amendment also in the law by
Section 7 of Act 40 of 1975, adding the following at the end of the
Explanation to Section 123(7) of the Act:
(3) For the purposes of Clause (7), notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law, the publication in the Official Gazette of
the appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or
removal from service of a person in the service of the Central
Government (including a person serving in connection with the
administration of a Union territory) or of a State Government shall
be conclusive proof
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, and
(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment,
resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal
from service, as the case may be. is stated in Such
publication, also of the fact that such person was appointed
with effect from the said date, or in the case of resignation,
termination of service, dismissal or removal from service,
such person ceased to be in such service with effect from
the said date.
436. I find that this amendment, which was made retrospective, by Section
10 of Act 40 of 1975, makes the legal position still clearer. The learned
Counsel for the election-petitioner had assailed the validity of this
amendment on the ground that powers conferred by it upon the
Government are bound to be abused by those who hold the reins of
Government. I am afraid I am unable to see any force in this contention.
The presumption is that a bona fide use will be made of this power lodged in
such responsible hands. If such powers are ever exercised in a mala fide
manner, it is the particular exercise of the power that can be questioned and
struck down. The provision does not become invalid merely because it could
be abused as practically any provision of law can be by those who may want
to do so.
437. I will next take up the period from 14-1-1971 upto 25-1-1971, when
Shri Kapur is said to have gone and voluntarily worked at Rae Bareli. and to
have done whatever he could to organise the conduct of the Prime Minister's
election after his talks with the Prime Minister. The position with regard to
allegations in this period is summarised as follows:
1. He is said to have either led on to have joined a procession of
cars taken out on 14-1-1971 in the town of Rae Bareily as a part of
the election campaign for the original respondent although Shri U.S.
Yadav (P.W. 411, an Advocate, who was a staunch S. S. P. worker,
produced on behalf of the election-petitioner, clearly stated that he
had not seen Shri Kapur in that procession which he watched but he
had seen him only on 15-1-1971. The learned Judge, however, not
only relied on the evidence of Shri R.K. Singh (P.W. 42) but also on
that of Shri U.S. Yadav to hold that Shri Kapur must have been
"associated with" the procession of people seen in cars and jeeps
taken out on 14-1-1971 shouting Congress (R) party slogans to
start off the election campaign.
2. On 17-1-1971, Shri Kapur is said to have participated in an
election meeting held at the Clock Tower. On this allegation, the
learned Judge accepted the evidence of Shri R.K. Dixit (P.W. 31),
and Shri R.K. Singh, (P.W. 42). although both these witnesses only
stated that some confusion took place at the meeting and Shri R.K.
Dixit did not even remember whether any speech was made at all
by Shri Kapur. Shri R.K. Singh also did not state that Shri Kapur
actually made a speech but had said that "a disturbance took place
when Shri Kapur wanted to deliver a speech as a result of which he
could not do so." The learned Judge rejected the evidence of Shri
V.C Dwivedi (R.W. 18) supported by Shri Kapur (R.W. 32) himself,
that Shri Kapur was not present at all at this meeting. However, on
the evidence of the election petitioner's witnesses themselves, Shri
Kapur could do nothing whatsoever in furtherance of the election of
the original respondent at this meeting.
3. On 19-1-1971, Shri Kapur is said to have addressed a meeting at
village Nihasta where he is said to have gone in the company of
Prof. Sher Singh, a Minister of State in the Government of India.
Although, the tour programme of the Minister concerned showed
that the Minister went to that village to inaugurate a Telephone
Exchange on 18-1-1971, supported by the evidence of Jagannath
Prasad (R.W. 16), a resident of village Nahasta, and K. D. Pandey
(R.W. 17) Post Master. Sub-Post Office yet, the learned Judge
preferred the evidence of Shri R.K. Singh (P.W. 42) for the election-
petitioner despite the infirmity in this evidence that it was neither
consistent with the tour programme of the Central Government
Minister sent in advance for this function nor with the unshaken
evidence of those who organised the function.
4. It was alleged that Shri Kapur on 13-1-1971, again in the
company of Prof. Sher Singh, the Central Government Minister,
mentioned above, attended a meeting held in Lalgani. So far as this
particular allegation is concerned, the learned Judge thought that it
could not be accepted because it was supported only by one highly
partisan witness. Shri G.N. Pandey, against 4 faultless witnesses :
Abdul Jabbar (R.W. 25), Fatesh Bahadur Singh (R.W. 26), Ishwar
Chand (R.W. 27), and Ranjit Singh (R.W. 28).
5. On 19-1-1971, Shri Kapur was. said to be present at the
inaugural function of the Telephone Exchange at Behta Kalan and is
said to have delivered a speech there. The learned trial Judge
accepted the evidence of Pt. Shashank Misra, (P. W- 32), admittedly
a highly partisan witness, who was believed because of a question
out to him in cross-examination suggesting that there was uproar
when Shri Kapur started speaking so that nobody could hear what
he said. The learned Judge held that this amounted to an admission
of Shri Kapur's presence and participation in this meeting.
6. Shri Kapur was alleged to have delivered a speech on 18-1-1971
at the foundation laying ceremony of a new Post Office building at
Rae Bareli in the com pany of Prof. Sher Singh, the Central
Government Minister, mentioned above. This allegation was not
accepted on the ground that it was not supported by any evidence
whatsoever.
438. All that the witnesses could remember of Shri Kapur's speech, on each
occasion, was that he supported the original respondent's candidature. Out
of allegations of acts said to have been committed on 6 occasions by Shri
Kapur in this period, the learned Judge found only 4 instances proved. Out
of these, it was clear that Shri Kapur could not have done anything in
furtherance of the original respondent's election on 17-1-1971, when,
according to the election-petitioner's witnesses, he was not even allowed to
speak. Even if all the election petitioner's witnesses accepted by the learned
Judge are to be implicitly believed for this period the position is:
(a) On three occasions in this period, from 14-1-1971 to 25-1-
1971, Shri Kapur is shown to have made a speech supporting the
original respondent's candidature.
(b) There is no evidence whatsoever from any source that Shri
Kapur did so on any of these three occasions either after having
been requested by the original respondent to do so or with her
knowledge or consent or approval.
(c) The only evidence in the case, on the decisive question, coming
from the side of the original respondent, is that Shri Kapur did,
whatever he did, entirely on his own initiative and in his private and
individual capacity, without the slightest solicitation, request, or
suggestion from the original respondent who did not even know
what he was doing at Rai Bareli. And, this evidence, being un-
controverted, could not be rejected. In fact, it was not rejected by
the trial Court. It was ignored by it presumably under an erroneous
belief that it was not material.
439. There is no evidence whatsoever that Shri Kapur was constituted a sort
of general de facto agent of the Prime Minister even before he became her
election agent on 1-2-1971. Indeed, such a case, that Shri Kapur was
constituted a de facto agent of the Prime Minister, and, if so, what was the
scope of his authority, was not set up in the petition and was not put in
issue. therefore, there is no finding on it by the learned Judge. Could the
Court then, without any proof of any specific request or solicitation or even
knowledge of or consent to the doing of any particular acts Shri Kapur may
have done in this period make the Prime Minister liable for them in any way
? I think not. The election petitioner had to be confined to the case he had
set up. This, as already pointed out, could only be, on a fair reading of the
petition on issue No. 1, one of specific authorisation of particular individual
acts of Shri Kapur. Of this there is not only no evidence whatsoever on
record but the evidence is to the contrary.
440. Issue No. 1, as framed, and the form of findings given on it indicate
that the learned Judge realized that the election petitioner's case must be
confined to proof of specific acts or statements of the original respondent
herself which induced Shri Kapur, as a Government servant, to give some
assistance in furtherance of her election, but the discussion of evidence and
the inferences which the learned Judge reached upon the circumstances
found, indicated that the learned Judge thought that Shri Kapur was
constituted a sort of de facto agent even before Shri Kapur was clothed with
legal authority on 1-2-1971. This appears to me to be the underlying
current of thought and reasoning of the learned Judge- Thus, the result was
that what was really decided was the case of a de facto agency which was
neither set UP nor was the subject-matter of an issue. I, therefore, think
that the principle that no amount of evidence could be looked into on a case
not really set up was applicable here. It was quite unfair to expect the
original respondent to meet a case, not set up at all. Furthermore, the case
of de facto agency was. in the circumstances of the particular case, only
possible to set up if the Prime Minister had made some request to Shri
Kapur to So and conduct the election campaign even before he was
appointed her election agent on 1-2-1971. If this was not established by
evidence on record, it could be said that the bottom was knocked out of
even such a hypothetical case. Had a case of de facto agency been even
argued, it is not conceivable that certain cases of Division Benches of the
Allahabad High Court itself would not have been cited to show on what kind
of evidence it could succeed.
441. In Rustom Satin v. Dr. Sam-poornanan (1959) 20 Ele LR 221 it had
been held by a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court (V. Bhargava and
J.N. Takru. JJ.). inter alia (at p. 2431:
So far as the election law in this country is concerned it is a
creation of statute and as such has to be interpreted in accordance
with the provisions of that statute. Section 100 of the Act clearly
refers to corrupt practices committed by four classes of persons
only. viz., the candidate, his election agent, persons acting with the
consent of the candidate or his election agent, and those acting
without such consent. The corrupt practices committed by the first
three classes of persons are covered by Section 100(1)(b). while
those committed by persons falling in the fourth class are provided
against in Section 100(1)(d)(ii).
The same Bench of the Allahabad High Court in J.P. Rawat v. K.D. Paliwal. (1959) 20 ELR 443 had held (at p. 456): ...even in the case of admitted workers in whose case also general
consent to work for the candidate may be implied, the consent of
the returned candidate to corrupt practice or practices complained
against have to be separately proved, and reliance upon general
con sent, express or implied, to work legiti mately for the candidate
is not deemed sufficient.
442. After 14-1-1971, the Prime Minister, like everyone else concerned,
obviously believed that Shri Kapur was no longer a Government servant. As
I have already pointed out, this was the legally correct assumption. Even if
one were to assume, for the sake of argument, that this was not so and that
the learned Judge had correctly held that Shri Kapur's resignation became
effective from 25-1-1971, there could be no liability for a corrupt practice by
merely permitting Shri Kapur to resign. The uncontroverted evidence is that,
after resigning. Shri Kapur went to Rae Bareli voluntarily, without any
request or suggestion made to him by the original respondent or by
anybody else to go to Rae Bareli and work for her election. Even his
appointment as the original respondent's election agent on 1-2-1971,
according to Shri Kapur's evidence, was the result of a suggestion of Shri
Dal Bahadur Singh at Rae Bareli, apparently during the Prime Minister's visit
to her constituency.
443. Cases in which help rendered voluntarily by a Government servant
without any attempt by the candidate concerned to ''obtain" or "procure" it
were held not to constitute a "corrupt practice" of the candidate, whatever
be the impropriety of it for the Government servant himself, were
completely overlooked by the learned Judge. In Hafiz Mohd. Ibrahim v.
Election Tribunal (1957) 13 ELR 262 a Division Bench of Allahabad
(Mootham C.J. and Mukerii, J.) had pointed out that a Government servant
has a "private personality" too. Similar observations of Dua J. are found in a
Division Bench decision of the Punjab High Court (See : Ram Phal v. Braham Parkash MANU/PH/0122/1962. 444. On the conclusions reached by the learned Judge himself the acts of
Shri Kapur between the period 25-1-1971 and 6-2-1971, the date of the
publication of the notification, could not be taken into account as no corrupt
practice could Possibly exist in that period, due to the participation of Shri
Kaour in any election work. And, with regard to the two earlier periods,
beginning with 7-1-1971, I am unable to see, for the reasons given above,
how any corrupt practice could be committed by the original respondent,
vicariously due to anything done by Shri Kapur, even if one were to apply
the law as it existed before the amendment of the Act.
445. Another question, which I may now briefly consider, is the date from
which the original respondent could be said to have held herself out as a
candidate. If she was not a "candidate", upto 25-1-1971, as defined by law,
that would, in itself, be a sufficient ground for wiping out the effect of
findings of the learned Judge on the two periods dealt with above.
446. The learned Judge had inferred that the Prime Minister was a
"candidate" from 29-12-1970 as she had held herself out as a candidate
when she answered a question put to her on 29-12-1970 at a Press
Conference at New Delhi. The question and answer were as follows:
Q. A short while ago there was a meeting of the opposition leaders
and there they said that the Prime Minister is changing her
constituency from Rae Bareli to Gurgaon?
P. M. No, I am not.
In the witness box, the Prime Minister disclosed that what she meant by the
answer was that she would not contest from the Gurgaon constituency. On
further cross-examination, she stated:
It is wrong to assume that while giving the reply marked 'B' in the
transcript (Ext. 132) I conveyed that I was not changing my
constituency from Rae Bareli at all and emphatically held out that I
would contest election again from Rae Bareli. In my opinion there is
no basis for this assumption.
447. The learned Judge had, In preference to the statement of the Prime
Minister herself as to what she meant, together with the evidence given by
her Secretariat that there were entreaties or offers to her from other
constituencies that she should be their representative, relied on Press
reports and what members of other parties thought and did as a result of
the above-mentioned statement of the Prime Minister on 29-12-1970. The
learned Judge also referred to Paragraph 1(A) of the additional written
statement which runs as follows:
That in fact, there were offers, from other Parliamentary
Constituencies in India, requesting this respondent to stand as a
candidate for the Lok Sabha from those Constituencies and a final
decision in regard to the Constituency was announced by the All
India Congress Committee only on January 29, 1971, and she only
held herself out as a candidate on filing her nomination at Rae
Bareli on 1st of February, 1971 (underlining, is by me.)" He had
also referred to the visits made by Congress (R) leaders to Rae
Bareily, particularly, Shri Dinesh Singh, and Shri Gulzarilal Nanda
and by Prof. Sher Singh. He had not accepted the explanation that
they had gone there of their own accord.
448. The learned Judge had also considered several English authorities but
had noted that the law here was not the same as in England. It had been
laid in Munniswami Gounder v. Khader Sheriff (1953) 4 ELR 283 (Ele. Tri.,
Vellore) where it was said:
In this respect the law in this country makes a significant departure
and that departure, in our opinion, again emphasises the
application of vital democratic principle, in the light of differing
conditions. We may here note, briefly, a feature of the political
practice in the United Kingdom, which repeatedly, colours and
influences the English Cases, viz., the fact that there a person is
often adopted as a candidate by a political association, without any
move on his be half, until a particular stage when the adoption is
formalised by his consent.
449. I am unable to see what bearing the activities of opposition leaders
and statements issued by them or Press Reports, with regard to the
candidature of the original respondent No. 1 from the Rae Bareily
constituency, had upon either an interpretation of her own statement of 29-
12-1970, or the date on which she made a final decision to stand as a
candidate from the Rae Bareily constituency or the communication of that
decision by her to her constituency. The material relied upon by the learned
Judge consisted of speculation and hearsay coming from persons who were
certainly interested in finding out which constituency the Prime Minister, who
had a choice of Gurgaon, a constituency much nearer to New Delhi, and,
possibly of other constituencies as well if she only wanted to change it.
Absence of proof of a desire to change the constituency is not proof of a
positive "holding out". It has been repeatedly laid down in decided cases on
the point that what is relevant is not what other people think or say about
what a possible candidate would do, but what the candidate concerned
himself has said or done, so as to amount to "a holding out" as a candidate
by the candidate from a particular constituency. Mere speculation or rumour
circulated by other persons interested in finding out the Prime Minister's
constituency could only prove what their own expectations or beliefs were.
This type of "evidence", strictly speaking, could not even be admissible
unless it could be related to something actually said or done by the
candidate. All that such "evidence" could prove was that people interested
were speculating or indulging in guesswork. It seems to me that the learned
Judge did not take into consideration the tactics in the political game which,
to some extent, every party participating in such a game adopts. Some of
those tactics are quite legitimate and honourable, but others are not.
450. The learned Judge referred to the contents of a speech made by the
Prime Minister at Coimbatore in South India, in the early part of January,
1971. castigating one of the tactics of the opposition parties in choosing Shri
Raj Narain to oppose her, for purposes of maximum "mud slinging". The
learned Judge pointed out that the Prime Minister admitted, in her evidence,
that she could have said this in her speech at Coimbatore, She was not
asked whether this amounted to holding herself out as a candidate from Rae
Bareily constituency. If such a question had been asked, there is little doubt
that she could have explained the statement by the context in which it was
made, just as she had given the precise meaning of her statement of 29-12-
1970, in the context in which it was made. Apparently, the context of the
statement made in early January in Coimbatore was that the opposition
parties had chosen a candidate, who, in the opinion of Prime Minister,
possessed certain capacity for "mud slinging" which others did not have. The
apparent object of what she mentioned in the speech was to expose tactics
of opposition parties in choosing such a candidate from a constituency from
which they thought the Prime Minister must be standing. It was obviously
meant to disparage such tactics and not to disclose her own intentions or
future course of action. A healthy democratic practice or convention
certainly is that the election of some candidates, of certain 6tature and
standing or position in public life, is not contested. To point out that the
opposition parties, far from intending to adopt such an attitude towards her,
were busy devising methods of maligning her, could not reasonably be
construed as a holding out of herself as a candidate from a particular
constituency unless one was predisposed to put such a construction on
every ambiguous statement of the Prime Minister, made anywhere after the
dissolution of Parliament in December, 1970. until the election in the first
week of March, 1971. Similarly, the context of the question of 29-12-1970,
put to the Prime Minister at a conference at New Delhi, was that members of
the opposition parties thought that she may be contesting from Gurgaon. In
the light of the opposition tactics, which the Prime Minister herself had
referred to in her speech at Coimbatore it was not unlikely that the Prime
Minister would have preferred to keep her own intentions about the
constituency, from which she would ultimately stand, either a closely
guarded secret, or, at least, in a fluid State. In any case, it was not likely
that she would announce her own intention very clearly to stand from any
particular constituency until it was considered by her or by her political
advisers to be politically expedient to do so. Again, it may be that the
prospect of such a leader standing from a particular constituency was likely
to have a politically exhilarating effect upon the workers or on party
activities in that constituency. From such a point of view also, the Congress
Party (R) of the Prime Minister may also have preferred that the Prime
Minister should not announce her decision until the last moment. A disputed
question of fact on such a matter could not possibly be determined by a
Court on evidence of guess-work or speculations of others which are, strictly
speaking, not relevant. I have indicated here that if some guess-work were
permissible, as it is to give its benefit to the person against whom
circumstantial evidence is to be used, other possible explanations and
interpretations were not excluded. The question had to be decided on Proof
of the actual statements and actions of the candidate herself which could
amount to clear and unequivocal expressions of intention, showing a
decision to stand from a particular constituency, meant primarily for the
benefit of the voters of the particular constituency so chosen by a candidate.
Where was that evidence here ?
451. It seems to me that the learned Judge had given an exaggerated
importance to what were either not strictly relevant or insignificant matters
in preference to what could be and was decisive and unequivocal.. I do not
think that the answer of the Prime Minister at the Press Conference on 29-
12-1970 or the contents of her speech in Coimbatore, in early January,
1971. or even a declaration or announcement of the All India Congress
Committee on 29-1-1971, assuming that there was such an announcement,
could mean that the Prime Minister had herself finally decided to contest
from the Rae Bareily constituency and had held herself out as a candidate
for this constituency. This holding out had to take place by the Prime
Minister herself and not by the Congress Committee. Even if the fact of a
declaration made by the Congress Committee, on 29-1-1971, which is all
that the written statement admits, proves that the Prime Minister was
chosen by her party for this particular constituency on this date, her own
decision on the matter could only come and was proved by her to have
actually come later than that. This admission was, in my opinion,
misconstrued by the learned Judge as a contradiction. In the absence of any
evidence whatsoever which could conflict with the Prime Minister's
statement about the actual date of her final decision to stand from this
Constituency, it seems to me that the learned Judge had no option
reasonably open to him except to accept the correctness of the only and the
best evidence on this question available in the case. The learned Judge in
observing, quite unnecessarily, that his finding on this question was not
going to be affected by the importance of the office held by the Prime
Minister, seems, subconsciously, to have been so affected by it that he did
not act on the normal rule that the best evidence of a person's state of mind
is his or her own statements and actions and not of others. He seems to
have felt that judicial independence consists in inverting this rule and
judging the matter primarily from the evidence of the states of minds and
opinions and actions of other individuals in the case of a Prime Minister of
this country. I do not consider this to be a judicially correct approach.
452. The fact that the tour programmes were circulated in advance for the
Rae Bareily District, in which the Prime Minister made electioneering
speeches, could also not determine what the final declaration of intention by
the Prime Minister was soma to be in regard to the Rae Bareily constituency.
It is not enough that the candidate should have by then formed an intention
to stand from a particular constituency. There is a gap between intent and
action which has to be filled by proof of either statements or of conduct
which amount to unequivocal declarations made to voters in the
constituency in order to amount to a "holding out" to them. This seems to
me to be the clear position in the law as laid down by Courts in this country
on the meaning of Section 79(b) of the Act.
453. It is significant that despite the large number of speeches and
statements the Prime Minister must have made throughout the country, in
this period, not a single statement made by her could even be cited in which
she had said before 1-2-1971, that she was standing as a candidate from
the Rae Bareily constituency. It is possible, as I have indicated above, that
this may be a part of the political game or permissible party tactics so as to
keep opposition parties guessing. It seems to me that the learned Judge
was overlooking the context, the probabilities, the natural course of events
in such a case, the legal and logical relevance and effect of what he thought
was decisive, and, finally, the importance of the statement of the Prime
Minister herself on this question supported by complete absence of any
evidence to show that she had herself made any clear and decisive
statement in any speech or conversation which could shake her stand, that
her final decision and unequivocal act was the filing of a nomination paper
as a candidate on 1-2-1971 at Rae Bareily. I may mention here that,
according to the findings of the learned Judge himself, the question of the
Prime Minister holding herself out as a candidate for the Rae Bareily
constituency became quite immaterial after 25-1-1971, and, on the findings
I have reached above, the whole question becomes unimportant. However, I
will indicate some authorities which the learned Judge himself had noticed.
454. In S. Khader Sheriff v. Munnuswami Gounder MANU/SC/0049/1955 :
[1955]2SCR469 . this Court said at p. 473 of SCR : at p. 777 of AIR:
When, therefore, a question arises under Section 79(b) whether a
person had become a candidate at a given point of time, what has
to be seen is whether at that time he had clearly and
unambiguously declared his intention to stand as a candidate, so
that it could be said of him that he held himself out as a prospective
candidate.
That he has merely formed an intention to stand for election is not
sufficient to make him a prospective candidate, because it is of the
essence of the matter that he should hold himself out as a
prospective candidate.
455. In J.P. Rawat v. Krishna Dutt Paliwal (1959) ELR (All) 443 a Division
Bench of the Allahabad High Court (V. Bhargava and J.N. Takru. JJ.),
following the decision of this Court in S. Khader Sheriff's case
MANU/SC/0049/1955 : [1955]2SCR469 :
The determining factor, therefore, is the decision of the candidate
himself, not the act of other persons or bodies adopting him as their
candidate.
456. In Haji Abdul Wahid v. B.V. Keskar (1960) ELR (All) 409 it was held by
a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court (R.N. Gurtu and S.N. Dwivedi, JJ.): (i) that the purchase of the nomination forms and voters lists, could
not amount to holding out as a candidate; (ii) the arranging of
public meetings by the officials and the respondent's moving about
in the constituency on the 15th and 16th could not by themselves
amount to a holding out by the respondent as a prospective
candidate on those days in the absence of evidence to show that
the respondent had utilised those meetings and tours for the
purpose of making utterances of an electioneering character.
457. In K.K. Mishra v. Banamali Babu, 38 ELR 451 : AIR 1968 Ori 200 the
Orissa High Court, relying upon the following observations of this Court in S.
Khader Sheriff's case MANU/SC/0049/1955 : [1955]2SCR469 , held that a
holding out within the meaning of Section 79(b) must be by declaration of
the candidate to an elector or to the electorate in a particular constituency
and not to others:
It may be that the holding out which is contemplated by that
section is to the Constituency : but if it is the Central Committee
that has to decide who shall be adopted for election from the
concerned constituency, any declaration made to the Committee is.
in effect, addressed to the constituency through its accredited
representative.
458. The view of the learned Judge appears to me to run counter to the{
weight of authorities cited above. In any case, if there was any uncertainty
at all, in the law, it has been removed by an amendment by Section 7 of Act
No. 40 of 1975 so that Section 79(b) reads as follows:
'Candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been
duly nominated as a candidate at any election.
459. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner contended that this
amendment, read with Section 10 of the Act 40 of 1975, would
retrospectively alter the "rules of the game" and would be destructive of the
concept of free and fair elections, if it means that a person is only a
candidate after he has been duly nominated and that he can indulge in any
amount of corrupt practices until the day previous to his nomination
460. Even if the present definition is a new one, it cannot be said to be
arbitrary. The concept contained in it is found in the English definition which
lays down : (See : Halsbury's Laws of England-3rd Edn. Vol. 14 p. 162):
...a candidate in relation to a parliamentary election means a
person who is elected to serve in Parliament at the election or a
person who is nominated as a candidate at the election, or is
declared by himself or by others to be a candidate on or after the
day of the issue of the writ for the election.....
The English definition is wider but contains, as its first - part, the very
concept found in our new definition of a "candidate.
461. Corrupt practices of a candidate cannot go unpunished, whether they
are committed before or after he becomes a candidate, when they amount
to acts which come within the purview of electoral offences dealt with by
Chapter 3, Sections 125, 126, 127, 127(a) or Chapter 9-A of the Indian
Penal Code. Offences, such as bribery, for purposes of either inducing
persons to vote or not to vote or to stand or not to stand as candidates,
undue influence, and personation, are all dealt with here. These should be
sufficient deterrents against perversion of the electoral process by a
prospective candidate, who wants to adopt corrupt and objectionable means
for gaining success at the polls.
462. The amendment appears to me to be within the unquestionable powers
of Parliament to legislate, either prospectively or retrospectively. with regard
to election matters. I am unable to see how it is capable of being
interpreted as an attack on free and fair elections, which, according to the
learned Counsel for the election-petitioner, is part of the basic structure of
the Constitution. I think it is important to bear in mind that Courts cannot
take upon themselves the task of laying down what electoral laws should be.
The law makers, assembled in Parliament, are presumed to know and under
stand their business of making laws for the welfare and well-being of the
mass of people of this country, for the protection of democracy and of free
and fair elections, in accordance with the needs of the democratic process,
better than Courts know and understand these. It is only where a piece of
legislation clearly in fringes a Constitutional provision or in dubitably
overrides a Constitutional purpose or mandate or prohibition that Courts can
interfere. After having listened to the lengthy and vehement arguments of
the election petitioner, I fail to see any invalidity in this provision.
463. I will now take up issue No. 3 of the 1st set of issues on which, after
rejecting the contention that the erection of barricades and the provision of
the police force for security purposes by the Government of U.P. during the
election tours of the Prime Minister on 1-2-1971 and 25-2-1971 in the Rae
Bareli constituency, contravened Section 123(7). the learned Judge held
that, nevertheless, the arrangements made by the District Magistrate of Rae
Bareli, the Superintendent of Police, Rae Bareli, the Executive Engineer.
P.W.D. and the Engineer, Hydel Department, for constructing rostrums and
the supply of power for loud speakers, on the instructions given by the State
Government, was a corrupt practice struck by the provisions of Section
123(7) of the Act. As I have already indicated, the only evidence relied upon
by the learned Judge for this extraordinary finding, after having rejected a
similar allegation of a corrupt practice under issue No. 2. on account of
provision of the Air Force planes and helicopters flown by members of the
Air Force, on necessary official instructions, to enable the Prime Minister to
go to places where she could address election meetings on 1-2-1971 and
25-2-1971, was that the visits of the Prime Minister to her constituency on
these occasions were preceded by the issue from the Prime Minister's Office
of the tour programmes to the officials of the District through the State
Government with the knowledge and consent of the Prime Minister. The
State Government had acted in compliance with the instructions issued by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India in 1958; read with Rule 71 (6)
of what is known as the Blue Book. The relevant part of this rule reads as
follows:
It has been noticed that the rostrum arrangements are not always
properly made because the hosts are sometimes unable to bear the
cost. As the security of the Prime Minister is the concern of the
State, all arrangements for putting up the rostrum, the barricades
etc. at the meeting place, including that of an election meeting, will
have to be made by the State Government concerned.
464. The Government of India had also issued a letter (Ex. A=21) dated 19-
11-1969 inviting the attention of the State Governments to Rule 71(6),
mentioned above, and directing them to ensure that, whenever rostrums
are constructed on such occasions, they should conform to certain
specifications laid down with due regard to security considerations. The
letter also directed the State Governments to bill the political party
concerned with expenses upto 25% of the cost of the rostrums or Rs.
25,000/-, whichever is less. The letter also directed that extravagance in
expenditure should be avoided.
465. It was proved by the evidence of Shri R.K. Kaul (P.W. 58) the Home
Secretary in the Government of U.P., that rostrums and arrangements for
barricading are made by the local officials employing contractors for the
purpose, under instructions issued by the State Government. The reasoning
adopted by the learned Judge, however, was that as the Prime Minister's
Office had issued her tour programmes, with the approval of the Prime
Minister, the result must be, in the language of the learned Judge himself:
...the tour programmes carried en an implied direction that the
State Government should also get constructed rostrums and
arrange for public address system for the election meetings to be
addressed by her on 1st of February. 1971 and 25th of February,
1971. It should be presumed that the respondent No. 1, as Prime
Minister, of this country, and with five years experience of that
office behind her in 1971, also knew that the said work was to be
done by the officers of the State Government.
466. This meant that the learned Judge was holding the Prime Minister
herself responsible for instructing the State Government knowing that it will
make the necessary arrangements through its servants. The case thus
accepted, that the Prime Minister was employing the State Government as
her agency in pro curing the aid of the officers concerned, was neither set
up nor put in issue. Apart from this objection, the learned Judge overlooked
that the provisions of Section 123(7) were intended to prevent solicitation
for aid and not sending of in formation to the State Government in the
course of ordinary official business even if the candidate concerned knows
that the State Government is bound, under the rules, to make the necessary
arrangements dictated by the needs of security of the Prime Minister and
convenience of the public.
467. The view of the learned Judge involves holding that the "persona" (a
term derived from the concept of the mask worn by Greek actors on the
stage in a drama) of a candidate during an election must not only be
different from that of the Prime Minister, but also that, when the two
capacities are held by the same person, what is due to the occupant of the
office of the Prime Minister must be withdrawn when the same person acts
as a candidate. On a similar argument, with regard to use of helicopters and
aeroplanes, the learned Judge himself had refused to acknowledge what
amounts to a separable legal personality of a candidate in the eyes of law.
The ground given for this difference between the use of aeroplanes and
helicopters by the Prime Minister and the use of rostrums by her was that
the former was more connected with the office or capacity of the Prime
Minister and that the latter was exclusively meant for her use in the capacity
of a candidate. Even if we were to recognise this distinction between the
"persona" of the Prime Minister and that of a candidate, it is impossible to
separate the special arrangements made for the security of the person of
the Prime Minister from those to which she may be entitled as a candidate
only. It is impossible.to deny at any time the facilities and precautions
meant for the person who holds the office of the Prime Minister to the
person just because she also figures as a candidate at an election. So long
as the person is the same what is meant for the person must be attributed
to the persona or capacity of the Prime Minister and not to that of a
candidate only. The learned Judge, however, thought that a candidate, who
happens to hold the office of the Prime. Minister of the country, is not
entitled to the facilities or precautionary measures taken to protect the
person of the holder of the office when electioneering as though the Prime
Minister and the candidate were two different persons. He was unable to see
that, so long as the person was the same, the distinction between, the two
capacities or personae. for the purposes for which facilities were given and
protection provided, was both factually as well as legally impossible and
quite immaterial.
468. I also think that the learned Judge erred in holding that such a case
could be one of solicitation of official aid and assistance at all. It is a case in
which certain precautions are taken and arrangements made almost
"automatically", .if one may use this word here, by officers of the State as a
matter of duty towards the office held by a candidate who undoubtedly
enjoys certain advantages which an ordinary candidate cannot have. It is as
futile to complain of such a distinction made as it is to complain that a
candidate possesses certain advantages at an election because of the
personal services rendered to the country or distinctions achieved by the
candidate. Again, there are advantages which attach themselves to a
candidate because of that candidate's personal dualities, qualifications,
capacities or background. The appurtenances of office or distinctions
achieved are, in my opinion, comparable to such personal advantages in so
far as they are not enioyed because they are "obtained" or "procured". If
such a result in law is unfair, it is not for Courts to find a remedy by
accepting the argument advanced before us also : that those who enjoy the
benefits of office must be made to realize and suffer some of its handicaps.
This clearly means the benefit which law gives, without solicitation by the
candidate, must be converted, by a judicial fiat, into a disadvantage and a
handicap. It is for Parliament to step in and change the law if an alteration
of it is considered necessary by it. The only change that need be made in
the law, if that could be the legislative intent, is to provide that the holder of
any office for the time being would not be Qualified to stand at an election.
In that event, holders of all Ministerial Offices will have to resign before they
offer themselves as candidates. But. such is not our law found in the 1951
Act or anywhere else. I think that it would be extending the scope of Section
123(7) too wide to hold that the facilities automatically provided by the
State to the Prime Minister, by virtue of his or her office, are also struck by a
provision directed against solicitation of official aid and assistance by
candidates.
469. The learned Judge had mentioned a Division Bench decision of the
Allahabad High Court in Motilal v. Mangla Prasad MANU/UP/0200/1958 :
AIR1958All794 where it was laid down:
We think that the word 'obtain' in Section 123(7) has been used in
the essence of the meaning which connotes purpose behind the
action of the candidate. The word has not been used in the Sub-
section in the sense of a mere passive receipt of assistance without
the candidate even being conscious of the fact that the assistance
has been rendered. In order to bring the case under Sub-section
(7), it must be shown that the candidate did make some effort or
perform some Purposeful act in order to get the assistance.
470. He had also cited another Division Bench decision of the Assam High-
Court in Biresh Mishra v. Ram Nath Sharma 17ELR 243 that:
The words 'obtain' or 'procure' or 'abetting or attempting to obtain
or procure' any assistance necessarily imply some effort on the part
of candidate or nig agent. Mere passive receipt of assistance is not
contemplated by the Section.
471. I think that the import of such observations was clearly what has been
laid down repeatedly by this Court and emphasized by me already that a
mens rea as well as an actus reus must be shown, on the evidence on
record, before a candidate can be held guilty of a corrupt practice. In Sheopal Singh v. Ram Pratap MANU/SC/0184/1964 : [1965]1SCR175 this Court held, in dealing with the allegation of corrupt practice under Section
123(4) of the Act, that mens rea was a necessary ingredient of the corrupt
practice and that the doctrine of constructive knowledge was not applicable
here.
472. In the case before us, the election petitioner alleged a wrongfully
"obtained and procured" assistance due to acts of the original respondent as
well as her election agent Shri Yashpal Kapur. Hence, proof of actual mens
rea as well as actus reus on the part of either the candidate herself or her
election agent had to be given. This was not done. The election petition was,
therefore, liable to be rejected on this ground alone.
473. If, however, there was any doubt or uncertainty on the matter, the view
taken by the learned Judge had, at any rate, directed the attention of
Parliament to the need for a clarification of the law which became necessary.
It is not possible to object to the motives behind, the legislation on this
ground. Parliament could certainly set right a defect in law which may have
come to its notice as a result of the learned Judge's interpretation of Section
123(7). The defect may be due to a possible ambiguity. In order to clarify
the law. Section 7 of the Act 40 of 1975 inserted a proviso at the end of
Section 123(7), which runs as follows:
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the discharge or
purported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or
provides any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in
relation to, any candidate or his agent or any other person acting
with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, (whether by
reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason),
such arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to
be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate's election.
474. The learned Counsel for the election petitioner has. very fairly, con
ceded that, if this amendment, which is retrospective by reason of the
operation of Section 10 of Act 40 of 1975, is valid, the decision of the
learned Judge on the above mentioned issue No. 3 would not be
"sustainable. Such a concession, incidentally, means that whatever facilities
were given to the Prime Minister by the construction of rostrums or
provision of power for the loud-speakers, for which the party was also billed,
at least to the extent of l/4th of the expenses of the rostrums and wholly as
regards the expenses of loud-speakers, were given by the officers concerned
in the performance of their official duties. This is not the same thing as
"obtaining" or "procuring" by solicitation.
475. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner has, however, put forward
the same objection to this retrospective amendment as the one against a
change in the definition of "candidate". It appears to me that this
amendment is merely clarificatory of the state of law as it really was even
before the amendment. On the view I take, there is no question here of
altering the "rules of the game" to the disadvantage of the election
petitioner. The disadvantage, if any. was there already because of the
consequences which, I think, legally and naturally flow from the occupation
of the high office of the Prime Minister of this country.
476. There is no attack on the validity of Section 123(7) of the Act as it
existed before the amendment. Hence, there could be no challenge to the
validity of the amendment if it does not, as I think it does not. change the
law but merely clarifies it.
477. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner contended that, as' a
candidate at an election, the Prime Minister and an ordinary candidate
should enjoy equal protection of the laws and should be afforded equal
facilities irrespective of the office occupied by one of two or more
candidates. Such an attack upon the validity of this amendment seems to
me to be possible only under the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution.
But, as Act 40 of 1975, has been placed by Section 5 of the 39th
Amendment in the protected 9th Schedule of the Constitution, it becomes
immune from such an attack. After the practically unanimous opinion of this
Court in Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461
, that' such an immunization of an enactment from an attack based upon an
alleged violation of the chapter on fundamental rights is Constitutionally
valid, I do not think that a similar attack can be brought in through the back
door of a "basic structure" of the Constitution. Moreover. I am unable to see
how this particular amendment has anything to do with damage to any part
of the "basic structure" of the Constitution. Even if an attack on the ground
of a violation of Article 14 were open today, I think that the occupation of
such a high and important office as that of the Prime Minister of this
country, with all its great hazards and trials, would provide a rational basis
for reasonable classification in respect of advantages possessed by a Prime
Minister as a candidate at an election due to arrangements made necessary
by considerations of safety and protection of the life and person of the Prime
Minister. Hence, I am unable to see any sustainable ground of attack at all
on the validity of this provision.
478. Before I proceed further, I may mention that I have dealt with the
findings of the learned Judge, assailed by the original respondent's appeal
No. 887 of 1975. perhaps in greater length and depth, after going through
the evidence in the case, than I had set out to do. I have done so for
several reasons. Firstly, I think that the nature of the attack upon the bona
fides of the amendments made, although ordinarily not even entertain able,
having been permitted due to the Constitutional importance and gravity of
the allegations made, this question could not, in my opinion, be
satisfactorily dealt with without considering the nature of the findings and
the evidence at some length so as to satisfy myself that no such question
could possibly arise here. Secondly, if the amendments were made
necessary for reasons brought out fully only by dealing with facts and
findings in this case, they could not give rise to any grounds to suggest that
there was anything wrong in making amendments to remove such reasons.
therefore, I think, it was necessary to go into these for determining whether
the amendments are good. Thirdly, even if the amendments are valid, we
had to be satisfied that the tests of corrupt practices alleged are not fulfilled
despite the concession of the election petitioner's learned Counsel that this
would be the position. Fourthly. I find that the learned Judge has made
certain manifest errors in appraising the evidence and interpreting the law
which call for rectification by this Court as no other authority can properly
do this.
479. It appears to me, as already indicated by me, that the learned Judge
was perhaps unduly conscious of the fact that he was dealing with the case
of the Prime Minister of this country. He, therefore, as he indicated in his
judgment, seemed anxious not to allow this fact to affect his judgment.
Nevertheless, when it came to appraising evidence, it seems to me that, as
I have already pointed out, he applied unequal standards in assessing its
worth so as to largely relieve the election petitioner of the very heavy onus
of (sic) that lies as a party which challengers the (sic) of the electors by
allegations of corruptions practices. He also appeared to be attempting to
achieve, by mean of individual interpretation, an equalisation of conditions
under which, in his opinion candidates should Contest elections. I think that
it is not the function ox Courts to embark, on attempts to achieve what is
only in the power of Parliament to accomplish, that is to say, to bring about
equality of conditions where the law permits justifiable discrimination. As
this Court has repespectively pointed out to treat unequally situated and
circumstanced persons as though they were equals In the eye of law for all
purposes is not really to satisfy the requirements of the equality
contemplated by [the Constitution,
480. As regards appraisal of evidence in such a case, I may point out that, In Rahim Khan v. Khurshid Ahmed MANU/SC/0274/1974 : [1975]1SCR643 Krishna Iyer, J., speaking for this Court, said:
An election once held is not to be treated in a light-hearted manner
and defeated candidates or disgruntled electors should not get away
with it by filing election petitions on unsubstantial grounds and
irresponsible evidence, thereby introducing' a serious element of
uncertainty to the verdict already rendered by the electorate. An
election is a politically sacred public act, not of one person or of one
official, but of the collective will of the, whole constituency. Courts
naturally must respect this public expression secretly written and
show extreme reluctance to set aside or declare void an election
which has already been held unless clear and cogent testimony
compelling the Court to uphold the corrupt practice alleged against
the returned candidate is adduced. Indeed, election petitions where
corrupt practices are imputed must be regarded as proceedings of a
quasi-criminal nature wherein strict proof is necessary. The burden
is therefore heavy on him who assails an election which has been
concluded-
This Court also said there at p. 672 (of SCC) : at p.299 of AIR:
We regard it as extremely unsafe, in the present climate of
kilkenny-cat election competitions and partisan witnesses wearing
robes of veracity, to upturn a hard won electoral victory merely
because lip service to a corrupt practice has been rendered by some
sanctimonious witnesses. The Court must look for serious
assurance, unlying circumstances or unimpeachable documents to
uphold grave charges of corrupt practices which might not merely
cancel the election result, but extinguish many a man's public life.
481. I will now take up the election petitioner's Cross Appeal No. 909/75.
Learned Counsel for the election petitioner, very properly and frankly,
conceded that, he could not. successfully assail the findings of the learned
Judge on issues Nos. 4. and 7 relating to alleged distribution of quilts,
blankets, dhotis, and liquor by workers of the original respondent or the
alleged provision of free conveyance by vehicles said to have been hired by
Shri Kapur. The evidence on these questions given by the election petitioner
was too flimsy and extravagant and was met by overwhelming evidence to
the contrary given by respectable residents of localities in which the alleged
corrupt practices are said to have taken place. No driver of any conveyance
was produced. Nor was any person produced who had actually received any
alleged gift or had consumed anything provided on behalf of the successful
candidate.
482. As regards Issue No. 2, relating to the use of aeroplanes and
helicopters by the original respondent which was not separately pressed
evidently because it was covered by the amendment which was assailed by
the election petitioner, the reasons I have given on issue No. 3 for upholding
the validity of the amendment relating to the services rendered by Govt.
Officials and members of defence forces in due discharge of their duties are
enough to cover the points raised.
483. As regards Issue No. 6 relating to the adoption of the drawing of a cow
and a calf as the symbol of the Congress (R) Party of the original
respondent, the finding of the Trial Court, based on a large number of
authorities, was that this is not a religious symbol. This question was
directly decided in Bhartendra Singh v. Ram Sahai Pandey
MANU/MP/0051/1972 : AIR1972MP167 ; Shital Prasad Misra v. Nitiraj Singh
Chaudhary M.P. Gazette. 23-6-1971. Pt, I. p. 809 paras 18 to 23 decided by
M.P. High Court on 21-7-1971 : and Sri Prasanna Das Damodar Das Palwar
v. Indu Lal Kanhafya Lal Yajnik Gujarat Gazette D/- 20-7-1972. pt. 4C, p.
1042 at pp. 1355 to 1362., decided on 27-8-1971 by the High Court of
Gujarat. The learned Judge also cited the following cases where it was
decided that a cow is not a religious symbol:
Shah Jayanthi Lal Amba  Lal v. Kasturi Lal Nagin Das Dosi (1968)
ELR (Guj) 188 : Baijnath Singh Vaidya v. R.P. Singh (19681) ELR All
327; Bisham-bhar Dayal v. Rai Raieshwar (1968) ELR All 363 :
Dinesh Dang v. Daulat Ram (1968) ELR (Raj) 463; Shyamlal v.
Mansa Din (1968) 37 ELR (All) 67; B.P. Maurya v. Prakashvir Shastri
(1968) 37 ELR All 137; Sohadar Rai v. Ram Singh Aharwar (1968)
ELR (MP)176; Vishwanath Pd. v. Salamat Ullah. (1965) ELR (All)
145 and Lachchi Ram v. J.P. Mukhariya (1953) ELR 149 (Ele. Tri.-
Gwalior).
484. In addition, Section 8 of the Act 40 of 1975 has made the position on
this point also very clear by providing that, in Section 123 of the Act in
Clause (3), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end:
Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall
be deemed to be a religious symbol or a national symbol for the
purposes of this clause.
485. As in the case of other amendments, this amendment was also
challenged on behalf of the election petitioner on the ground that it could be
misused. I am afraid that attacks made on such sweeping suggestions of
likelihood 6i misuse, in future, cannot possibly succeed. It has been
repeatedly laid down by this Court that the possibility of misuse of a power
given by a statute cannot invalidate the provision conferring the power. (See : Dr. N.B. Khare v. State of Delhi MANU/SC/0004/1950 : [1950]1SCR519 ; State of W.B. v. A.A. Sarkar MANU/SC/0033/1952 : 1952CriLJ510 ; R.K. Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar MANU/SC/0024/1958 : [1959]1SCR279 : T.K. Mudaliar v. Venkatachala MANU/SC/0021/1955 : [1956]29ITR349(SC) ; Chitralekha v. State of Mysore MANU/SC/0030/1964 : [1964]6SCR368 ; M.R. Deka v. N.E F Rly. MANU/SC/0261/1963 : (1964)IILLJ467SC . The
occasion to complain can only arise when there is such alleged misuse. Even
the possibility of such misuse of this power by so responsible an official as
the Election Commissioner cannot be easily conceived of.
486. It was submitted that the Election Commissioner's decision on this
question was unreasonable. The best class of evidence as to what is and
what is not to be reasonably regarded as a religious symbol, according to
the customs, mores, traditions, and outlook of the people of a country at a
certain time consists of contemporaneous decisions of Courts. It is useless
to quote passages from ancient texts about the sacredness of the cow in
support of the use of the cow as a religious symbol today The use of
pictures of this excellent and useful animal is so frequently made today for
commercial purposes or purposes other than religious that the
representation of a cow and a calf cannot, except in some special and purely
religious contexts, be held, to have a religious significance. I, therefore, see
no force at all in this submission of the election petitioner.
487. The only question argued with some seriousness in the election
petitioner's appeal was that the election expenses, which form the subject-
matter of Issue No. 9, had exceeded the limit of authorised expenditure
imposed by Section 77 of the Act read with Rule 90. On this issue, the
learned Judge had considered every allegedly omitted item of expense very
thoroughly and had reached the conclusion that the following 3 items,
totalling upto Rs. 18,183.50. had to be added to the return of election
expenses of the original respondent which mentioned items totalling upto
Rs. 12,892.97. These were : (1) Cost of rostrums Rs. 16,000/-(2) Cost of
installation of loud-speakers Rs. 1,951/-; (3) Cost of providing transport for
one journey by car Rs. 232.50.
488. On this issue, the learned Judge's appreciation of evidence was not
only very thorough and correct, but the application of the governing law on
the subject also appears to me to be faultless. Ordinarily, we do not, sitting
even in first appeals on questions of law as well as of fact in election cases,
go Into findings of fact arrived at without misapplication of law or errors of
approach to evidence. In the case before us, two main questions and one
subsidiary question, each of which is a mixed question of fact and law, which
deserve consideration by this Court on this issue, have been raised before
us. I will deal with these questions briefly seriatim.
489. The first question is : If the party, which a candidate represents,
spends or others also spend some money on his or her election, is this
expenditure one which can be or should be properly included in the
statement of election expenses submitted by the candidate ? Arguments
before us have proceeded on the assumption made by both sides that some
expenditure was incurred by the Congress (R) Party and some expenditure
must also have been incurred by those who either voluntarily helped or even
thrust their supposed assistance, whether it was helpful or not, upon those
managing the original respondent's election, which was not shown as part of
her election expenses. Is the successful candidate bound, under the law, to
show this also as part of election expenses ?
490. This question assumed special Importance after the decision of this
Court in Kanwarlal Gupta v. Amarnath Chawl MANU/SC/0277/1974 :
[1975]2SCR259 , where a Division Bench of this Court observed!
Now, if a candidate were to be subject to the limitation of the
ceiling, but the political party sponsoring him or his friends and
supporters were to be free to spend as much as they like In
connection with his election, the object of imposing the veiling
would be completely frustrated and the beneficent provision
enacted in the interest of purity and genuineness of the democratic
process would be wholly emasculated. The mischief sought to be
remedied and the evil sought to be suppressed would enter the
political arena with redoubled force and vitiate the political life of
the country. The great democratic ideal of social, economic and
political justice and equality of status and opportunity enshrined in
the Preamble of our Constitution would remain merely a distant
dream eluding our grasp. The legislators could never have intended
that what the individual candidate cannot do, the political party
sponsoring .him or his friends and supporters should, be fret : to
do. That, is why the legislators wisely interdicted not only the
incurring but also the authorising of excessive expenditure by a
candidate. When the political party sponsoring a candidate incurs
expenditure m connection with his election, as distinguished from
expenditure on general party propaganda, and the candidate
knowingly takes advantage of it or participates in the programme or
activity or fails to disavow the expenditure or consents to it or
acquiesces in it, it would be reasonable to infer, save in special
circumstances, that he impliedly authorised the political party to
incur such expenditure and he cannot escape the rigour of the
ceiling by saying that he has not incurred the expenditure, but his
political party has done so. A party candidate does not stand apart
from his political party and if the political party does not want the
candidate to incur the disqualification, it must exercise control over
the expenditure which may be incurred by it directly to promote the
poll prospects of the candidate. The same proposition must also
hold good in case of expenditure incurred by friends and supporters
directly in connection with the election of the candidate.
491. After making the above-mentioned observations, the apparently broad
sweep of the observations was limited as follows:
It may be contended that this would considerably inhibit the
electoral campaign of political parties but we do not think so. In the
first place, a political party is free to incur any expenditure it likes
on its general party propaganda though, of course, in this area also
some limitative ceiling Is eminently desirable coupled with filing of
return of expenses and an independent machinery to investigate
and take action. It is only where expenditure is incurred which can
be identified with the election of a given candidate that it would be
liable to be added to the expenditure of that candidate as being
impliedly authorised by him. Secondly, if there is continuous
community involvement in political administration punctuated by
activated phases of well-discussed choice of candidates by popular
participation in the process of nomination, much of unnecessary
expenditure which is incurred today could be avoided.
492. It is not necessary to quote further from the judgment which suggests
taking of steps for reform of electoral machinery so as to ensure "choice of
candidates by popular participation in the process of nomination", because
that would take us into a territory beyond mere interpretation of the law as
it exists. It is clear from the passages cited and later parts of the judgment
that the earlier decisions of this Court, requiring proof of authorisation by
the candidate of the election expenditure for which he could be held
responsible, and, in particular Rananjaya Singh v. Baijnath Sing
MANU/SC/0091/1954 : [1955]1SCR671 which I shall refer to again a little
later, are considered. It is enough to observe that the passages quoted
above rest on the assumption that, where there are special circumstances in
a case which constitute a political party an implied agent of the candidate
himself, the candidate will be responsible. It was also suggested there that a
political party itself must exercise some control over the expenses of the
candidate it sets up. The objection was to a candidate merely using the
political party as a channel or cover for expenses incurred by the candidate
himself. This explains the exclusion of expenses for "general party
propaganda" from those for which the candidate is accountable and liable.
Such expenses could be, it was held, properly incurred by the party itself,
irrespective of the source from which the party obtained funds for carrying it
on. What is declared to be expense incurred by the candidate is that
expense which his party may incur either as an express or implied agent of
the candidate and that only.
493. The difficulty which faces the election petitioner at the outset in taking
up a case of implied authorisation, on the strength of anything observed or
decided by this Court in Kanwarlal Gupta's case MANU/SC/0277/1974 :
[1975]2SCR259 / is that no such case was set up here. The petition does
not say that the local Congress (R) Party was really an express or implied
agent of the original respondent or that it had acted in a manner from which
it could be inferred that the funds were really being supplied by the original
respondent and were merely being spent by the party or its workers for the
election under consideration. No facts or circumstances were at all indicated
either in the petition or in evidence from which such Inferences were
possible. On the other hand, what is sought to be pointed out now in the
case before us is that a sum of Rs. 70,000/- was shown to have been
received from some undisclosed sources by Shri Dal Bahadur Singh, the
President of the District Congress Committee at Rae Bareily, and that a large
part of it was shown, from entries fn the bank account of the President of
this Committee, to have been disbursed during or soon after the election.
The responsibility of the District Congress Committee was, however, to carry
on propaganda and supply information in 3 Parliamentary Constituencies.
Neither party summon ed Shri Dal Bahadur Singh to give evidence so that it
could not be proved what proportion of any of this sum of Rs. 70,000/-was
spent and in what work and for which of the 3 Parliamentary constituencies.
All that was alleged, in paragraph 13 of the petition, is that the "expenditure
Incurred by the respondent No. 1, Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi and/or her
election agent Shri Yashpal Kapur was much more than Rs. 35,000/- which
was the permissible amount". After that, particulars of 11 items were given,
out of which the first was hiring of 32 vehicles whose numbers are
mentioned. There Is no mention whatsoever in this list of any sum paid
either by the original respondent or by anyone else on her behalf to Shri Dal
Bahadur Singh or of any expense incurred on behalf of the original
respondent by this gentleman. The principle that no amount of evidence can
be looked into on a case not set up is sufficient to dispose of this evidence of
a cheque of Rs. 70,000/- received by Shri Dal Bahadur Singh.
494. It is true that the case set up is that the prescribed limit, of
expenditure was exceeded and the case is so stated that items beyond the
list could conceivably be added. Nevertheless, unless and until there is a
plea that whatever was spent by the Congress (R) Party, either as an
express or implied agent of the original respondent, this loop-hole left in the
petition would not suffice. Section 83(1)(b) of the Act contains the
mandatory provisions that the petition "shall set forth full particulars of any
corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as
possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt
practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice.
495. The judgment of this Court, in Kanwarlal Gupta's case
MANU/SC/0277/1974 : [1975]2SCR259 discusses a number of cases
decided by this Court which shows that it Is not enough to prove
expenditure of money by a candidate's party or friends or relations. It must
be also proved that this was expenditure authorised by the candidate and
incurred as the candidate's express or implied agent. These cases were:
Rananjaya Singh v. Baijnath Sing MANU/SC/0091/1954 : [1955]1SCR671 ; Ram Dayal v. Brijraj Singh MANU/SC/0269/1969 : [1970]1SCR530 ; Magraf Patodia v. R.K. Birla MANU/SC/0322/1970
: [1971]2SCR118 and B. Raiagopala Rao v. N.G. Ranga
MANU/SC/0314/1970 : AIR1971SC267 .
496. After examining this catena of cases, I think, with great respect, that
the decision of this Court in Kanwarlal Gupta's case MANU/SC/0277/1974 :
[1975]2SCR259 could be understood to point in a direction contrary to that
in which the previous cases were decided. Hence, it appears to me that the
amendment made by Act 58 of 1974, by adding the explanation (1) to
Section 77(1) of the Act could be justified as merely an attempt to restore
the law as it had been understood to be previous to decision of this Court in
Kanwarlal Gupta's case (supra):
Explanation 1.-Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of
any court to the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorised in
connection, with the election of a candidate by a political party or
by any other association or body of persons or by any individual
(other than the candidate or his election agents shall not be
deemed to be, and shall not ever be deemed to have been,
expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorized
by the candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this
sub-section:
Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect
(a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court
whereby the election of a candidate to the House of the
People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State has been
declared void or set aside before the commencement of the
Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1974, (b) any judgment, order or decision of a High Court
whereby the election of any such candidate has been
declared void or set aside before the commencement of the
said Ordinance if no appeal has been preferred to the
Supreme Court against such judgment, order or decision of
the High Court before such commencement and the period
of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before such
commencement.
497. It appears to me that both parties to the case now before us were
under the impression that the expenses incurred by a political party over its
candidate's election was outside the prescribed limit which operated only
against expenditure by a candidate himself. Hence, the petitioner had not
pleaded expenses incurred by the party of the original respondent as
expenses authorised by the original respondent. The test of authorisation
would naturally be the creation of a liability to reimburse whoever spends
the money and not necessarily the provision of money before-hand by the
candidate on whose behalf it is spent. Nevertheless, the authorisation has to
be set up and proved. In the written statement filed on behalf of he original
respondent, it was very frankly admitted that some expenditure, incurred by
the local Congress Party itself, had not been shown as election expenses of
the candidate herself. This was the position because, on the side of the
original respondent also, the law was understood to be as it is found now
clarified by the addition of an explanation to Section 77(1) of the Act.
498. The second question which arises for consideration Is : if some
expenses are shown or admitted to have been incurred by the candidate's
party or third persons over the election of the successful candidate, is it
possible to separate it from a total expenditure on more than one
constituency by some process of estimation and apportionment ? Of course,
this " question can only arise if it is first proved that whatever expenditure
was incurred by candidate's party or by some other person, who may be a
friend, a relation, or a sympathiser, was incurred in circumstances from
which it can be inferred that the successful candidate would reimburse the
party or person who incurred it. As I have already held, it is only then that
expenditure could be held to be authorised by the candidate. It is not
enough that some advantage accrued or expenditure was incurred within
the knowledge of the candidate. This was very clearly brought out in
Rananjaya Singh v. Baiinath Singh MANU/SC/0091/1954 : [1955]1SCR671 .
In this case, the Manager, Assistant Manage Rule 20 Zila-dars, and peons of
the proprietor of an estate In Uttar Pradesh had carried on election work,
after having been given a holiday on full pay by the proprietor of the estate
who was the father of the successful candidate. It was contended that
inasmuch as these persons were virtually employees of the candidate
himself, their salary for the day must be added to the list of election
expenses. This Court repelled this contention on the ground that this extra
expenditure had not been authorised by the candidate or his agent Hence, it
need not be shown as an item of election expense. Voluntary expenditure by
friends relations, or sympathisers and expenditure incurred by a candidate's
party, without any request or authorisation by the candidate, has never
been deemed to be expenditure by the candidate himself. (See : Ram Dayal v. Brijraj Singh MANU/SC/0269/1969 : [1970]1SCR530 ; Magraj Patodia v. R.K Birla MANU/SC/0322/1970 : [1971]2SCR118 .
499. An attempt was then made to pass the responsibility on to the original
respondent for the expenses of at least 23 vehicles whose numbers are
mentioned in a letter dated 25th February, 1971, writ ten by Shri Kapur,
who then (was) the original respondent's election agent, and sent to the
District Officer, Rae Bareily, stating as follows:
Sir, I beg to say that the District Congress Committee, Rae Bareily
has taken the following cars for election purposes in the three
Parliamentary Constituencies, Rae Bareily, Amethi and Ram Sanehi
Ghat. You may, therefore, kindly release them.
After giving numbers of the vehicles the letter proceeds:
It is therefore requested that the above said cars may kindly be
released without delay. The letter of the President of District
Congress Committee about the above said cars is enclosed here
with.
The letter of the President of the Committee, mentioned by Shri Kapur. was
a rather urgent request made to him by Shri Dal Bahadur Singh, on 24-2-
1971 (Ex. A-43), after informing him that he is in difficulties as he had tried
to find out unsuccessfully the whereabouts of Shri V. Vajpayee, who was
contesting election from Amethi Parliamentary Constituency, and of Shri
Baiznath Kureel, who was contesting the election from Ram Sanehi
Parliamentary Constituency. He, therefore, asked Shri Kapur, the election
agent of the original respondent, to send a letter to the District Officer, who
had refused to release the vehicles without the endorsement of the
candidate concerned or his or her election agent.
500. It is clear from the abovementioned correspondence that Shri Kapur
was not speaking on behalf of the other two candidates of adjoining
Parliamentary Constituencies. He was not even undertaking to pay anything
for the use of the vehicles on behalf of the original respondent. Shri Kapur
also did sot state that these vehicles were needed for work In the original
respondent's constituency.
He merely forwarded the letter with a request for compliance with what Shri
D.B. Singh wanted. Shri Dal Bahadur Singh was concerned and entrusted
with conducting electioneering work in three adjoining Parliamentary
Constituencies successfully. He had; therefore, made a frantic appeal to Shri
Kapur to come to his help. Shri Kapur, without concealing any fact, had sent
this very letter with a request for the release of the vehicles to the District
Officer concerned. On this evidence, the learned Judge came to the
conclusion that it was not possible to say which vehicles, said to be jeeps,
had been utilized for election work and in which constituency. The learned
Judge after considering the evidence recorded the finding that it was not
possible to hold that the 23 vehicles in question had been used exclusively
for the purposes of the election of the original respondent, and not for
"general party propaganda purposes" for which the original respondent was
not liable to pay.
501. In Hans Rai v. Hari Ram (1972) ELR (SC)125 this Court in a similar
situation said:
Whichever way one looks at the matter it is quite clear in view of
the decision of this Court reported in Rananjaya Singh v. Baiinath
Singh MANU/SC/0091/1954 : [1955]1SCR671 that the expenditure
must be by the candidate himself and any expenditure in his
interest by others (not his agents within the meaning of the term in
the election law) is not to be taken note of, Here the hiring was by
the Congress Committee which was not such an agent and
therefore the amount spent by the Congress Committee cannot be
taken as an amount which must compulsorily be included in the
expenditure over the election by a candidate. If this be the position,
we have to decide whether this amount spent on the jeeps must be
taken to be an expenditure made by the candidate himself. Of that
there is no evidence. The bill stands in the name of the Congress
Committee and was presumably paid by the Congress Committee
also. The evidence, however, is that this jeep was used on behalf of
the returned candidate and to that extent we subscribe to the
finding given by the learned Judge. Even if it be held that the
candidate was at bottom the hirer of the jeep and the expenditure
on it must be included in his account, the difficulty is that this jeep
was used also for the general Congress propaganda in other
constituencies.
502. In Shah Javantilal Ambalal v. Kasturilal Nagindas Doshi (1972) ELR
307, this Court held:
It is now well settled that expenses incurred by a political party in
support of its candidates do not come within the mischief of Section
123(6) read with Section 77 of the Act.
503. In Samant N. Balakrishna v. George Fernandez MANU/SC/0270/1969 :
[1969]3SCR603 this Court pointed out:
In India all corrupt practices stand on the same footing. The only
difference made is that when consent is proved on the part of the
candidate or his election agent to the commission of corrupt
practice, that itself is sufficient. When a corrupt practice is
committed by an agent and there is no such consent then the
petitioner must go further and prove that, the result, of the election
m s(c) far as the returned candidate is concerned was materially
affected
504. However, as 1 have already held, there is no rase or evidence before us
that the Congress Party was the agent, express or implied, of the original
respondent or acting as the channel through which any money whatsoever
was spent by the original respondent. The petition could not possibly
succeed on the ground of exceeding election expenses. On the other hand,
on the findings given by me above, the expenses on the construction of
rostrums were also erroneously added by the learned Judge, In fact, it
seems that other two items mentioned there were also wrongly added.
Expenses of the installation and use of loud-speaker's and the power
supplied were certainly shown to have been borne, by the Congress Party
itself. It is true that when elections of persons in the position of the Prime
Minister or even of Ministers, whether in the Central Government or a State
Government, take place, a number of people come forward to either give or
thrust their supposed aid in the election. It may be impossible for the
candidate to refuse it without offending them. But it is also impossible for
the Courts to make the candidate himself or herself responsible so as to
impose an obligation upon the candidate to find out what expenses incurred
by them were and then to add these on to the candidate's account of
expenses. That would be. obviously, a most unfair result. And, this is not
what the law requires in this Country. The law requires proof of
circumstances from which at least implied authorisation can be inferred.
505. The third and the last and a subsidiary submission on behalf of the
election petitioner, on election expenses,, was that, Shri Dal Bahadur Singh
not having been produced by the original respondent, some sort of
presumption arises against the original respondent. I do not think that it is
possible to shift a burden of the petitioner on to the original respondent
whose case never was that Shri Dal Bahadur Singh spent any money on her
behalf. The case of M. Chenna Reddy v. Ramchandra Rao (1972) ELR SC 390
was relied upon to submit that a presumption may arise against a successful
candidate from the non-production of available evidence to support his
version. Such a presumption, under Section 114 Evidence Act, it has to be
remembered, is always optional and one of fact, depending upon the whole
set of facts. It is not obligatory.
506. In Chenna Redy's case (1972) ELR SC 390), the evidence seemed to
have resulted in a prima facie case whose effect the respondent had to get
rid of- In the case before us, the election petitioner had summoned Shri
M.L. Tripathi (P.W. 59), the Secretary of the District Congress Committee,
who appeared with account books of the Party at Rae Bareily. The election
petitioner could get nothing useful out of his evidence. Even if the election
petitioner did not, for some reason, desire to summon Shri Dal Bahadur
Singh similarly, his counsel could have requested the Court to exercise its
discretionary powers under Order XVI, Rule 14 C.P.C. but this was never
done. A presumption could, not arise on the facts and circumstances of a
case in which it could not be said that Shri Dal Bahadur Singh's evidence
was necessary to discharge some burden of the original respondent. The
original respondent had discharged whatever onus lay upon her by
producing her own election agent Shri Kapur, who had kept her accounts.
And, she had herself appeared in the witness-box and faced a cross-
examination which could not be held up as an example of complete fairness
and propriety. I do not quite understand what presumption could possibly
arise, due to non-production of Shri Dal Bahadur Singh, against what part of
her case, and to what effect. It could certainly not be suggested that there
was any duty on her part to repeal some case never set up against her. It
was nobody's case that the local Congress Party was her agent.
507. I may now very shortly deal with the objection that, as a number of
Members of Parliament belonging to the opposition parties were in
detention, under the preventive detention laws, which could not be
questioned before the Courts of law, because of the declaration of the
emergency by the President, there was a procedural defect in making the
amendments of the Act of 1951 and the 39th Constitutional Amendment.
508. Article 122 of the Constitution prevents this Court from going into any
question relating to irregularity of proceedings "in Parliament". It reads as
follows:
122. (1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be
called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of
procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested
by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the
conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be
subject to the jurisdiction of any Court in respect of the exercise by
him of those powers.
509. What is alleged by the election petitioner is that the opposition
Members of Parliament, who had been detained under the preventive
detention laws, were entitled to get notice of the proposed enactments and
the 39th Amendment, so as to be present "in Parliament", to oppose these
changes in the law. I am afraid, such an objection is directly covered by the
terms of Article 122 which debars every Court from examining the propriety
of proceedings "in Parliament". If any privileges of Members of Parliament
were involved, it was open to them to have the question raised "in
Parliament". There is no provision of the Constitution which has been
pointed out to us providing for any notice to each Member of Parliament.
That, I think, is also a matter' completely covered by Article 122 of the
Constitution. AH that this Court can look into in appropriate cases is whether
the procedure which amounts to legislation or, in the case of a Constitutional
amendment, which is prescribed by Article 368 of the Constitution, was
gone through at all. As a proof of that, however, it will accept, as conclusive
evidence, a certificate of the Speaker that a Bill has been duly passed. (See : State of Bihar v. Kameshwar MANU/SC/0020/1952 : [1952]1SCR1020 . 510. Again, this Court has held, in Sharma v. Sri Krishna.
MANU/SC/0020/1960 : [1961]1SCR96 . that a notice issued by the Speaker
of a Legislature for the breach of its privilege cannot be questioned on the
ground that the rules of procedure relating to proceedings for breach of
privilege have not been observed. All these are internal matters of
procedure which the Houses of Parliament themselves regulate.
511. As regards the validity of the detentions of the Members of Parliament,
that cannot be questioned automatically or on the bare statement by
counsel that certain Members of Parliament are illegally detained with some
ulterior object. The enforcement of fundamental rights is regulated by
Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution and the suspension of remedies
under these Articles is also governed by appropriate Constitutional
provisions. Their legality and regularity can not be collaterally assailed by
mere assertions made by Counsel before us. I, therefore, overrule these
objections to the validity of the amendments and the 39th Amendment as
we cannot even entertain them in this manner in these proceedings.
512. I will now turn to the validity of Clause (4) of Article 329-A sought to
be added by Section 4 of the 39th Amendment. I will quote the whole of
Section 4 as some argument was advanced on the context in which Clause
(4) of Article 329-A occurs. Section 4 reads as follows:
4. In Part XV of the Constitution, after Article 329, the following
article shall be inserted, namely:
329-A. (1) Subject to the provisions of Chapter II of Part V
(except Sub-clause (e) of Clause (1) of Article 102). no
election
(a) to either House of Parliament of a person who
holds the office of Prime Minister at the time of
such election or is appointed as Prime Minister
after such election;
(b) to the House of the People of a person who
holds the office of Speaker of that House at the
time of such election or who is chosen as the
Speaker for that House after such election:
shall be called in question, except before
such authority (not being any such
authority as is referred to in Clause (b) of
Article 329) or body and in such manner
as may be provided for by or under any
law made by Parliament and any such law
may provide for ail other matters relating
to doubts and disputes in relation to such
election including the grounds on which
such election may be questioned.
(2) The validity of any such law as is referred to in Clause
(1) and the decision of any authority or body under such
law shall not be called in question in any court.
(3) Where any person is appointed as Prime Minister or, as
the case may be, chosen to the office of the Speaker of the
House of the People, while an election petition referred to
in Clause (b) of Article 329 in respect of his election to
either House of Parliament or, as the case may be. to the
House of the People is pending, such election petition shall
abate upon such person being appointed as Prime Minister
or, as the case may be, being chosen to the office of the
Speaker of the House of the People, but such election may
be called in question under any such law as is referred to in
Clause (1).
(4) No law made by Parliament be fore the commencement
of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, in
so far as it relates to election petitions and matters
connected therewith, shall apply or shall be deemed ever to
have applied to or in relation to the election of any such
person as is referred to in Clause (1) to either House of
Parliament and such election shall not be deemed to be
void or ever to have be come void on any ground on which
such election could be declared to be void or has, before
such commencement, been declared to be void under any
such law and notwithstanding any order made by any
Court, before such commencement, declaring such election
to be void, such election shall continue to be valid in all
respects and any such order and any finding on which such
order is based shall be end shall be deemed always to have
been void and of no effect.
(5) Any appeal or cross appeal against any such order of
any court as is referred to in Clause (4) pending
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, before the Supreme
Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions
of Clause (4).
(6) The provisions of this article shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution.
513. Counsel for both sides are agreed that for the purposes of the case
before us, we need not consider the Constitutional validity of Clauses (1) to
(3) of the newly introduced Article 329-A of the Constitution I will therefore,
concern myself only with the Constitutional validity of Clause (4) of Article
329-A of the Constitution.
514. Learned Counsel for the election-petitioner contended that the
constituent or amending power contained in Article 368 of our Constitution
had been misused to achieve some purpose which was either outside the
Article or which struck at the roots of the "basic structure" or "the essential
features" of our Constitution. It was submitted that the amendment is
invalid on an application of the tests laid down by a majority of the 13
Judges who indicated certain basic and inviolable principles of our
Constitution in Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 . It was contended that the newly added Article 329-A(4)
of the Constitution, far from constitution a Constitutional law, which alone
could be made under Article 368, did not even satisfy the tests of a law, in
as much as it did not lay down any general rule applicable to all cases of a
particular class but was really designed to decide one particular election
case, which is now before us for hearing, in a particular way. According to
learned Counsel, the amending bodies had, under the guise of an exercise of
constituent power, really decided a particular election dispute arbitrarily
without following the elementary principles of judicial procedure or applying
any intelligible norms or principles of justice either as a Court of law would
have done or as any body of persons entrusted with the duty to decide a
matter justly or quasi-judicially could possibly have done. The assumption
underlying this argument was that setting aside the results of a judicially
recorded judgment and order by declaring it void and the validation of an
election held by a Court of law to be invalid necessarily involves the
adoption of a judicial or a quasi-judicial procedure if the results are to
appear just and not violative of the basic principles of natural justice which
must be held to be parts of the Rule of law envisaged by our Constitution.
What had been done by Clause (4) according to the learned Counsel for the
election petitioner, was. nothing short of lifting and placing the elections of
the first four dignitaries of State outside. the range of questionability before
any authority whatsoever either in. the past, present or future. As the only
election out. of these dignitaries still in dispute at the time of the passing of
the 39th Amendment was the election of the Prime Minister to the House of
the People, now under consideration in the appeals before us, it was
suggested that all this was done, wholly and solely, though indirectly, with
the object of validating the Prime Minister's election as a Member of the
House of Representatives in 1971. It sought to place the Prime Minister and
the Speaker in a separate class by themselves as candidates at a general
election for the membership of the House of Representatives. It was urged
that there could be no reasonable or logical nexus between the alleged
objects of such a classification and the results of the amendment made. It
was urged, that, inasmuch as a Prime Minister holds the pivotal position in
the governance of the country, there could not be a less and not more need
to ensure that the election of the holder .of such a high office to a
Parliamentary seat had been free from any corrupt practice. It was urged
that the test and the procedure for determining whether the holder of such
an exalted, responsible, and important office was duly elected as a Member
of Parliament could not, logically or reasonably, be different from that which
ordinary Members of the Parliament had to So through. It was pointed out
that, in a case covered by this clause, there could be no consideration at all.
if the amendment is upheld, of the validity of a past election by any
authority in the future as all ejections in this very special and exceptional
class had been validated without any qualification and quite unconditionally.
The effect was, it was urged, that the present Prime Minister was placed in a
very privileged and exalted position which was not enjoyed by a past Prime
Minister and which was not meant to be occupied by any future Prime
Minister. Such a procedure and such a result, it was contended, made a
mockery of the concept of free and fair elections under a democratic
system. Furthermore, it was urged that it was destructive of the concepts of
rule of law, of equality before law. and of just determination of judicially
triable disputes. Taking away of even the supervisory jurisdiction of superior
"Courts in elections of a certain class of dignitaries was characterized as a
gross violation of a basic principle of our Constitution. It was also submitted
that. If what was intended to be conveyed by the amendment was that
Parliament had withdrawn the case before us from the sphere of judicial
scrutiny and determination and had decided in uself, .as was stated in Ms
opening address by the learned Counsel for the original! respondent, not,
merely was - the basic eo-ostitutuwial principle of separation of powers set
at naught but the primordial rule of natural justice, that no one should be a
judge in his own cause, had been infringed inasmuch as the dispute was
really between a majority party and the numerically minority groups or
parties in the Houses of Parliament. No hearing could be given to leaders of
the numerically minority groups of parties in Parliament because they were,
it was submitted, illegally detained under Preventive Detention laws after a
declaration of emergency by. the President of India, with the result that
members of Parliament who did not support the ruling party were denied
access to Courts so as to secure their release from detention and could not
take part in proceedings which produced the Acts amending the Act of 1951,
and, the 39th Amendment. I have already dealt with and rejected the
objection to the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament, on the collateral
ground of allegedly illegal detentions of opposition leaders,
515. All the contentions of learned Counsel for the election petitioners, apart
from the alleged procedural defect in amending the Act of 1951 and the
Constitution when a number of opposition Members of Parliament are
detained under the Preventive Detention laws, already dealt with by me,
seemed directed towards producing two results either simultaneously or
alternatively; firstly, to persuade us to hold that the constituent power had
been exceeded or sought to be utilised for extraneous purposes falling
outside the purview of Article 368 of the Constitution altogether : and,
secondly, to convince us that the effects of the 4th clause of Article 329-A
must be such that, If this purported addition to our Constitution was upheld,
the "basic structure or the "basic features" or "the underlying principles" of
our Constitution will be Irreparably damaged so that it could not any longer
be looked upon as the same Constitution. It was submitted that the majority
view in Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 ,
which was binding upon us, will compel us to invalidate Clause (4) of Article
329-A. There was in the course of arguments, considerable overlapping
between tests and considerations appertaining to the purposes and those
involving the effects, consequences, or implications of Clause (4) if it was
upheld. It was proposed that purposes should be ascertained and their
validity determined, inter alia, in the light of the consequences and
implications of upholding the validity of the impugned clause. Both sets of
contentions involved a definition of the scope of Article 368 and a
determination of the exact nature of the function actually performed by the
constituent authorities in passing the impugned Clause (4) of Article 329-A.
516. We have heard the learned Attorney-General and the learned Solicitor-
General of India, in defence of the 4th clause of Article 329-A sought to be
added by the 39th Amendment, as well as Mr. A.K. Sen and Mr. Jagannath
Kaushal. learned Counsel for the original respondent, who also supported
the validity of the impugned clause. The 1st contention of the learned
Counsel seemed directed towards inducing us not to look beyond the
language to discover the purposes or the nature of the function performed
in passing Clause (4) of Article 329-A or its effects. This contention had
necessarily to rest upon the assumption that provisions of Clauses (4) and
(5} and (6) of Article 329-A, sought to be introduced by the 39th
Amendment, were valid and had the effect of depriving this Court of
jurisdiction to determine the validity of Clause (4) by exploring the purposes
and objects which may lie behind the plain meaning of Clause (4). Our
difficulty, however, is that, even an attempt to give its natural and literal
meaning to every word used in Clause (4). after hearing the statements
made by learned Counsel supporting the 39th Amendment, to the effect that
Parliament had itself examined the validity of whatever order and findings
on question of fact or law. are referred to there, and had reached the
conclusion that the order and each of the findings of fact on which it was
based must be adjudged to be void and of no effect, baffles us very much.
This could only mean that Parliament, in its constituent capacity, had
functioned as though it was a direct Court of Appeal from a judgment of the
High Court while an appeal in the last Court is pending-a procedure which
has not been shown to have been followed so far in any case brought to our
notice either decided in this country or anywhere else in the world, all the
cases cited to support such a view being distinguishable on facts and law
applicable.
517. In the circumstances of this case, set out above, the findings on
contested questions of fact and law and the order indicated by Clause (4)
could only be those contained in the judgment under appeal by both sides
before us. The language of Clause (4) was, according to the submissions of
learned Counsel supporting the amendment, itself meant to convey that,
after going" into the disputed questions of fact, the constituent bodies had
reached the conclusion that the order and the findings must have no legal
effect. Indeed, the Solicitor-General went so far as to submit that Parliament
must be deemed to be aware of the contents of the whole record of the
proceedings in the High Court, including the pleadings, the evidence, and
the findings in the judgment of the High Court, as these were all available to
it. In other words, we must imagine and suppose that, whatever may be the
actual position. Parliament had sat in judgment over the whole case as a
Court of appeal would have done. But, the impugned Clause (4), if valid,
would compel us to make a contrary assumption Inasmuch as it declares
that all laws prior to the 39th Amendment, relating to election, petitions and
"matters connected therewith", which must include the grounds given in
Section 100 of the Re presentation of the People Act, 1951, were neither to
be applied nor ever deemed to have applied to such a case as the one
before us. This surely meant that they must be "deemed" not to have been
applied by Parliament itself, according to the well-known rule of construction
that a legal fiction, introduced by a deeming provision, must be carried to its
logical conclusion and we must not allow our imagination to boggle at the
consequences of carrying the fiction to its logical conclusions (See : East
End Dwellings Co. Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council (1952) AC 109).
518. At the same, time, it was contended, and, this was especially
emphasised by Mr. Jagannath Kaushal, that Parliament and the ratifying
legislatures of the State-participating in the Constitution making process-
had not applied any pre-existing norms but had merely declared and
registered, almost automatically, without any need to consider anything
further or to apply any law whatsoever to any facts, what followed from the
abrogation of all pre-existing law, with its procedure and norms, so far as
the election-petition against the original respondent was concerned. This
meant that the constituent bodies, proceeding on the. assumption that the
High Court had rightly held the original respondent's election to be invalid
by applying the provisions of the 1951 Act, had considered it necessary to
validate what really was invalid according to the 1951 Act. In view of what I
have already held on merits, such an assumption, if it was there at all, could
only be based on a misconception.
519. The conflicting points of view, advanced in support of the amendment,
enabled the election-petitioner's counsel to find support for his contention
that the impugned Clause (4) obviously meant that a considered judgment
on, inter alia, disputed questions of fact, however, erroneous, had been
swept aside, quite unceremoniously, mechanically, and, without a semblance
of a quasi-judicial procedure, by a purported exercise of constituent power
by the constituent bodies, consisting of the two Houses of Parliament and
the ratifying legislatures of the various States. He urged that the alternative
contentions of Mr. Kaushal constituted an. admission that no procedure
whatsoever, which could be considered either reasonable or appropriate for
a judicial or quasi-judicial determination of any question of fact or law was
followed. He contended that whichever of the two alternative contentions of
counsel supporting the 39th' Amendment was accepted by us, his
submission, that the amendment was ultra vires, arbitrary, and improperly
motivated was made out.
520. The essence of judicial or quasi- judicial function is the application of a
law which is already given by the law making authority to the judicial or
quasi-judicial authority to apply. This law has to be applied to certain
findings after determining the disputed Questions of fact in a manner which
must conform to the canons of natural justice. Learned Counsel for the
election petitioner con-, tended that it was not necessary to go beyond
Clause (4) to reach the conclusion that what was being done was to decide a
dispute which could, under the law as it existed till then, only be judicially
determined in the mode prescribed by Article 329(b) read with the Act of
1951 which could not be circumvented even before Article 329-A engrafted
exceptions on it and the Act of 1951 had been repealed retrospectively in its
application to the Prime Minister. The result of a sort of consolidated
legislative-cum-adjudicatory function was sought to be embodied in Article
329-A(4) by purported Constitutional amendment. He contended that we
were bound to consider and decide whether the "constituent power"
contained in Article 368 of the Constitution WAS meant to be used in this
manner. Such use would, he submitted, fall outside Article 368. Hence, he
submitted, there was no need to resort to principles emerging from a
consideration of what may be spoken of as the basic structure or essential
features of the Constitution. It was enough if we held that "constituent
power" did not cover such a use made of it. . Learned Counsel for the
election petitioner had thus advanced an alternative contention based upon
the meaning of the term "constituent power" introduced by the 24th
Amendment; and, in my opinion, we are duty bound to interpret Article 368
and determine the precise meaning of "constituent power" when properly
called upon by a party before us to do so. Indeed, the very contention that
we should so construe "constituent power" as to deny ourselves the
jurisdiction to decide the validity of what was done under a purported
exercise of such a power involves a determination of its meaning, I fail to
see how our jurisdiction to do this could be barred by the provisions of the
very amendment whose Constitutional validity is challenged before us was
repeals ed.
521. Learned Counsel supporting the 39th Amendment, had, in defence of
the Amendment, advanced arguments which go beyond the position which
was adopted to support the amendments considered by us in Kesavananda
Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . The new argument
now advanced, to use the language of the Solicitor-General in his last
written, submissions, is that "the power of amendment under Article 368 is
"the very original power of the people which is unbroken into the legislative
and the executive and the judicial". He submitted that the implied
limitations, to which the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharti's case
(supra), has committed this Court for the time being, are no longer available
when considering this "unbroken" power. Mr. A.K. Sen, learned Counsel for
the original respondent, puts this very argument in the following words in
his writ ten submissions:
In the hands of the constituent authority there is no demarcation of
powers. But the demarcation emerges only when it leaves the
hands of the constituent authority through well-defined channels
into demarcated pools. The constituent power is independent of the
fetters or limitations imposed by separation of powers in the hands
of the organs of the Government, amongst whom the supreme
authority of the State is allocated.
The constituent power is independent of the doctrine of separation
of powers. Separation of powers is when the Constitution is framed
laying down the distribution of the powers in the different, organs
such as the legislative, executive and the judicial power. The
constituent power springs as the fountain head and partakes of
sovereignty and is the power which creates the organ and
distributes the powers. therefore, in a sense the constituent power
is all embracing and is at once judicial, executive and legislative, or
in a sense super power. The constituent power can also change the
system of checks and balances upon which the separation of powers
is based.
522. The theory advanced before us may have been designed to escape the
logical consequences of the majority view in Kesavananda Bharti's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 which we cannot, .sitting as a
Bench of five Judges in this Court, overrule. The theory is, however, quite
novel and has to be, I think, dealt with by us. It postulates an
undifferentiated or amorphous amalgam of bare power constitution the
"constituent power". Accor ding to this theory, the power which constitutes
does not need to be either constituted or prevented from exercising a power
assigned by it already to a constituted authority. Hence, it is a power of a
kind which is above the Constitution itself. If I am not mistaken, the learned
Solicitor-General did say that the constituent power lies "outside" the
Constitution. In other words, it is independent and above the Constitution
itself because it operates on the Constitution and can displace it with, so to
say, one stroke of its exercise. I do not think that such an extreme theory
could be supported by the citation of either the majority or minority views of
Judges, barring stray remarks made in other contexts, either in the L.C.
Golaknath v. State of Punjab's case MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762
or In the Kesavananda Bharti's case (supra). In fact, in neither of these two
cases was the question raised or considered at all by this Court whether the
amending power or the "Constituent power" itself constituted such an
amalgamated concentration of power, said to be distributed by the
Constitution between the three different organs of State at a "subsequent
stage" whatever this may mean. The distribution of power of different kinds
between the three organs was compared to delegation of authority to agents
which could be withdrawn at any time by the constituent bodies.
523. If we were to accept the theory indicated above, it would make it
unnecessary to have a Constitution beyond one consisting of a single
sentence laying down that every kind of power is vested in the constituent
bodies which may, by means of a single consolidated order or declaration of
law, exercise any or all of them themselves whenever they please Whether
such powers be executive, legislative, or judicial. Could this be the ambit of
"constituent power" in our Constitution ? Would such a view not defeat the
whole purpose of a Constitution ? Does the whole Constitution so crumble
and melt in the crucible of constituent power that its parts cannot be made
out ? Before we could accept a view which carries such drastic implications
with it we will have to overrule the majority view in Kesavananda Bharti's
case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 . The majority view in that
case, which is binding upon us, seemed to be that both the supremacy of
the Constitution and separation of powers are parts of the basic structure of
the Constitution.
524. If "constituent power", by it itself, is so transcendental and exceptional
as to be above the provisions of the Constitution itself it should not. logically
speaking, be bound even by the procedure of amendment prescribed by
Article 368(2). I have not found any opinion expressed so far by any learned
Judge of this Court to show that the constituent power is not bound by the
need to follow the procedure laid down in Article 368(2) of the Constitution.
Indeed, rather inconsistently with the theory of an absolute and
unquestionable power In some undifferentiated or raw and unfettered form,
operating from above and outside the Constitution, learned Counsel, sup
porting the impugned 4th Clause in the 39th Amendment, concede that the
constituent power is bound by the appropriate procedure laid down In
Article 368 for the amendment of the Constitution. What they urge is that,
subject to this procedure, which has been followed here, the constituent
power cannot be questioned because it is a "sovereign power". The logical
consequence of such an argument also is that the majority view In
Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 was
erroneous. It also overlooks that judicial review of laws made by Parliament
is always a review of an exercise of "sovereign power". It may be that the
object of the learned Counsel In advancing this extraordinary theory was to
induce us to refer this case to a much larger bench so that the majority view
in Kesavananda Bharti's case (supra) may. If necessary, be overruled. I,
however, doubt whether putting forward such extreme and untenable
propositions is the best method of securing such a result.
525. I think that the possibly theoretical question indicated above, whatever
may be the object of raising it, does deserve to be seriously considered and
answered by us because it discloses a basic misconception. therefore. I
propose to consider it at a length which seems to me to be justified by our
need to clarify our thinking on a basic or "key" concept without a final
commitment to a particular view on it. Clearer thinking, by examining a
basic theoretical question from every conceivable angle, leads, I believe, to
that openmindedness which is needed by lawyers no less than by any other
class today so that we may, contrary to our reputation, be responsive to the
Inevitable challenges of change. Justice Holmes once said : "Theory is the
most important part of the dogma of law, as the architect is the most
important man who takes part in the building of a house ".(Holmes,
Collected Papers (1921) 200).
526. It seems to me that the words "sovereignty" and "sovereign power",
used repeatedly by learned Counsel defending the 39th Amendment to
describe the constituent power, should, for several good reasons, be
avoided, so far as possible, by lawyers who seek that clarity of thought for
which precision in language is the first requirement. One of these reasons
was given by Lord Bryce (Studies in "History and Jurisprudence" (1901)
(503-504)). "The frontier districts. if one may call them so, of Ethics of Law,
and of political science have been thus infected by a number of vague or
ambiguous terms which have produced many barren discussions and caused
much needless trouble to students No offender of this kind has given more
trouble than the so-called 'Doctrine of Sovereignty'." Prof; Melhvain,
however, opined : "But this very fact is proof of its vita! importance in our
modern world, and the wide variety of the views held concerning its
essence, as well as the conflicting conclusions to which these views still
lead, may furnish sufficient excuse for another attempt to clarify some of
our ideas touching this central formula under which we try to rationalize the
complicated facts of our modern political life." Another reason for eschewing
such expressions, so far as possible, is that they are "emotive" or of a kind
about which Mr. Leonard Schapiro, (writing on "Key concepts in Political
Science" Series, at p. 7) rightly observed, "Emotive words such as 'equality',
'dictatorship', 'elite' or even 'power' can often, by the very passions which
they raise, obscure a proper understanding of the sense in which they are,
or should be, or should not be, or have been used. Confucius regarded the
'rectification of names' as the first task of government. 'If names are not
correct, language will not be in accordance with the truth of things', and this
in time would lead to the end of justice, to anarchy and to war". At any rate,
in America, the concept of State Sovereignty, ranged against that of national
sovereignty, did produce a civil war which is said to have been precipitated
by the decision of the American Supreme Court in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1856) 19 How 393. 527. I must preface my observations here about the concepts of
"sovereignty" and exercise of "sovereign power", between which I make a
distinction, with two kinds of explanation. The first kind involves an
exposition of a functional or sociological point of view. I believe that every
social, political, economic, or legal concept or doctrine must answer the
needs of the people of a country at a particular time. I see the development
of concepts, doctrines, and institutions as responses to the changing needs
of society in every country. They have a function to fulfil in relation to
national needs. The second type of explanation may be called historical or
meant merely to indicate and illustrate notions or concepts put forward by
thinkers at various times in various countries so as to appropriately relate
them to what we may find today under our Constitution. We have to
appreciate the chronology or stages of their development if we are to avoid
trying to fit into our Constitution something which has no real relevance to it
or bearing upon its contents or which conflicts with these. It must not, if I
may so put it, be Constitutionally "indigestible" by a Constitution such as
ours. Of course, it is not a secret that we have taken some of the basic
concepts of our Constitution from British and American Constitutions in their
most developed stages. That too must put us on our guard against attempts
to foist upon our Constitution something simply because it happens to be
either a British or American concept of some particular period which could
not possibly be found in it today. therefore, both types of explanation
appear to be necessary to an exposition of what may or may not be found in
our Constitution.
528. I certainly do not think that Judges of this Court have or should think
that they have the power to consciously alter, under the guise of judicial
interpretation, what the Constitution declares or necessarily implies even
though our pronouncements, interpreting the Constitution, may have the
effect of contributing something to the growth or even change of
Constitutional law by clearing doubts, removing uncertainties, or filling up of
gaps to a limited extent. If the law embodied in our Constitution, as
declared by this Court, is not satisfactory, I do not think that we can or
should even attempt to stand in the way of a change of any kind sought
through appropriate Constitutional means by the Constitutionally appointed
organs and agencies of the State. If, however, this Court is asked to declare
as valid what seems to it to fall clearly outside the ambit of the Constitution,
and, indeed, what is even claimed to be operating from outside the
Constitution and described as a supra-Constitutional power, there may be no
alternative left to except to declare such a claim to be really outside the
Constitution. If we were to do that we would only be accepting the
professed basis of the claim without conceding its Constitutional validity.
After all, we are really concerned with the questions of Constitutional
validity which can only be resolved by references to what the Constitution
contains, either expressly or by a necessary implication, and not with what
is beyond its range except in so far as this also may be necessary to explain
what is or what is deemed to be a part of our Constitution.
529. The term "sovereign" is derived from the Latin word "Superanus" which
was akin to "Suzerian" suggesting a hierarchy of classes which characterised
ancient and medieval societies. In its origin, it is an attribute assigned to the
highest living human superiors in the political hierarchy and not some
abstract quality of a principle or of a law contained in a document-a
meaning, as will be shown here, which emerges clearly later. In times of
anarchic disorder or oppression, by local satraps or chieftains or barons or
even bullies and criminals, ordinary mortals have sought the protection of
those who could give it because of their superior physical might. No book or
document could provide them with the kind of help they need ed. They
looked upto their "Sovereign liege and Lord", as the medieval monarch was
addressed by his subjects, for protection against every kind of tyranny and
oppression.
530. The Greeks and Romans were not troubled by theories of "Sovereignty"
in a State. The principle that Might was Right was recognised as the
unquestioned legally operative principle at least in the field of their
Constitutional laws. Greek philosophers had, however, formulated a theory
of a Law of Nature which was, morally, above the laws actually enforced. In
later stages of Roman Law, 'Roman jurists also, saturated with Greek
actions of an ethically superior law of Nature, aid that the institution of
slavery, which gave the owner of a slave theoretically absolute powers of life
and death over the slave, just like the powers of a pater-familias over his
children, was contrary to jus naturale although it was recognised by jus
gentium, the Jaws of then civilised world. Aristotle, in his analysis of forms
of Government, had emphasized the importance of the Constitution of a
State as a test or determinant of sovereign power in the State. And. Roman
jurists, had, indirectly, cleared the path for the rise of modern legalism and
Constitutionalism by rescuing law itself from the clutches of a superstitious
severance for customs, surrounded with ceremonial and ritualistic
observances and cumbersome justice defeating formalism, through fiction
and equity, and forged a secular and scientific weapon of socio-economic
transformation. All this was very useful in preparing for an age in which
secular law could displace religion as the "control of controls" (see Julius
Stone's "Province and Function of Law" 1961 Edn. pp. 754.
531. Romans not only clarified basic notions but developed a whole armoury
of new forms in which Saw could be declared on made, Lex, Plebiscitum,
Magistratuum Edicta, Senatusconsulta, Responsa Prudentium, Prin-cipum
Placita. The last mentioned consisted of orders of Roman Emperors which
were of various kinds, some of general application to cases of particular
kinds and others for particular individual cases : Edicta, Decreta, Mandata,
Rescripta. They had the "force of law" or "Lex" which could be roughly
equated with bur statutory law. "Decreta" were issued as decisions on
individual disputes, in exercise of the Emperor's power "under" the authority
of "Lex de Mperio", although "in the classical period it was firmly established
that what the Emperor ordained had the force of law" (See : R.W. Leage on
Roman Law, Edn. 1961 p. 32). The point to note is that, even in the
embryonic stages of Government through legislation law-making and
decision of individual cases are found distinctly separate.
532. After the break-up of the Roman Empire, there were attempts in
medieval Europe, both by the Church and the Rings, to develop spiritual and
temporal means for checking wrong and oppression. Quests for the superior
or a sovereign power and its theoretical justifications by both ecclesiastical
and lay thinkers were parts of an attempt to meet this need. The claims of
those who, as vicars of God on earth, sought to meddle with mundane and
temporal affairs and acquire even political power and influence were, after a
struggle for power, which took different forms in different countries, finally
defeated by European Kings with the aid of their subjects. Indeed, these
Kings tried to snatch, and, not without success, to wear spiritual crowns
which the roles of "defenders of the faith" carried with them so as to
surround themselves with auras of divinity.
533. The theory of a legally sovereign unquestionable authority of the King,
based on physical might and victory in battle, appears to have been
developed in ancient India as well, by Kautaliya, although the concept of a
Dharma, based on the authority of the assemblies of those who were
learned in the dharmashastras, also competed for control over exercise of
royal secular power. High philosophy and religion, however, often seem to
have influenced and affected the actual exercise of sovereign power and
such slight Jaw-making as the King may have attempted. The ideal King, in
ancient India, was conceived of primarily as a Judge deciding cases or giving
orders to meet specific situations in accordance with the Dharma Shastras.
It also appears that the actual exercise of the power to administer justice
was often delegated by the King to his judges in ancient India. Indeed,
according to some, the theory of separation of powers appears to have been
carried so far (See : K.P. Jayaswal in "Manu and Yajnavalkya"-A basic
History of Hindu Law-1930 Edn. p. 82) that the King could only execute the
legal sentence passed by the Judge.
534. We know that Semetic prophets, as messengers of God, also became
rulers wielding both spiritual and political temporal power and authority
although to Jesus Christ, who never sought temporal power, is ascribed the
saying : "render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God things
that are God's". Accor ding to the theory embodied in this saying, spiritual
and temporal powers and authorities had to operate in different orbits of
power altogether. Another theory, however, was that the messenger of God
had been given the sovereign will of God Almighty which governed all
matters and this could not be departed from by any human authority or
ruler. In the practical administration of justice, we are informed, Muslim
caliphs acknowledged and upheld the jurisdiction of their Kazis to give
judgment against them personally. There is an account of how the Caliph
Omar, being a defendant in a claim brought by a few for some money
borrowed by him for purposes of State, appeared in person in the Court of
his own Kazi to answer the claim. The Kazi rose from his seat out of respect
for the Caliph who was so displeased with this unbecoming conduct that he
dismissed him from office. (See : Sir A. Rahim's "Muhammadan
Jurisprudence" (1958) p. 21).
535. The theory, therefore, that there should be a separation of functions
between. the making of laws, the execution of laws, and the application of
laws, after ascertaining facts satisfactorily, is not new. It is embedded in our
own best traditions. It is dictated, if by nothing else, by common sense and
the principle of division of labour, without an application of which efficient
performance of any duties cannot be expected.
536. We may now look back at the theory and practice of sovereignty, in
Europe. There, wise Kings, in the Middle ages, sought the support of their
subjects in gatherings or "colloquia", which in the words of Mr. De Jouvenel
(See : "Sovereignty an Inquiry into the Political Good" p. 177), "had the
triple character of a session of justice, a council of State and the timid
beginnings of a legislative assembly were the means by which the affairs of
the realm came more and. more into the hands of the King". He goes on to
observe : "The council of the King and the Courts of justice progressively
developed an independent life, the assembly remaining under the name of
Parliament in England and States-General in France.
537. Bodin, writing in the reign of Henry the III of France (1551 to 1589),
viewed sovereignty as an absolute unlimited power which, though
established by law, was not controlled by it. According to him, under an
ideal system, sovereignty was vested in the King by divine right. The King's
word was law. But, even according to Bodio, al though the Sovereign was
free from the trammels of positive law, as he was above it, yet, he was
"bound by divine law and the law of nature as well as by the common law of
nations which embodies principles distinct from these" (See : Dunning's
"History of Political Theories" : Ancient and Medeival p. 28). Hobbes, a
century later continued this line of thinking on an entirely secular and non-
moral plane. He opined : "Unlimited power and unfettered discretion as to
ways and means are possessed by the sovereign for the end with a view to
which civil society is constituted, namely, peace and escape from the evils of
the state of nature", in which the life of individuals was "nasty, brutish, and
short." Although, Hobbes visualised the existence of a social compact as the
source of the authority of the sovereign, yet, he looked upon the compact
only as a mode of surrender by the subjects of all their individual rights and
powers to the sovereign who could be either an individual or a body of
persons. Subjects, according to him, had no right to rely upon the compact
as a means of protection against the sovereign. He provided the fullest
theoretical foundations of a Machiavellian view of sovereignty.
538. As we know, in the 17th and 18th centuries, European monarchs came
in sharp conflict with the representatives of their subjects assembled in
"Parliament" in England and in "States-General" in France. And, theories
were put forward setting up, as against the claims of Kings to rule as
absolute sovereigns by indefeasible divine right, no lesser claims to
inviolability and even divinity of 'the rights of the people. But, theories
apart, practice of the art of Government proves that the effective power to
govern, by the very nature of conditions needed for its efficient exercise,
has had to be generally lodged in one or few especially in times of crisis, but
not in all those who represent the people even under democratic forms of
Government. Direct democracy, except in small city States such as those of
ancient Greece, is not practically feasible.
539. Theories of popular sovereignty put forward by Locke and Rousseau
came to the fore-front in the 17th and 18th centuries- an era of
revolutionary changes and upheavels. The theory of certain immutable
individual natural rights, as the basis of a set of positive legal rights,
essential and necessary to the fulfilment of the needs of human beings as
individuals, was advanced by Locke. He visualised a social contract as a
means of achieving the welfare of individuals composing Society. He also
advocated separation of powers of Government in a Constitution as a
method of securing rights of individual citizens against even their own
Governments. Montesquieu elaborated this theory. The ideas of Rousseau
were amongst those which contributed to produce that great conflagration,
the French Revolution, which was described by Carlyle as the "bonfire of
feudalism." Government, according to Rousseau, in all its Departments, was
the agent of the General Will of the sovereign people whose welfare must
always be its aim and object. But, the General Will for the time being was
also liable to err about the particular means chosen to achieve the ends of
good Government. There was, according to Rousseau, also another part of
the "General Will" which was more permanent and stable and unerring and
decisive. He hinted that there was what Bosanquet (See : The Philosophical
Theory of the State-Chap. V) called the "Real Will", the basis of which was
found in Rousseau's philosophy. As pointed out by T.H. Green, in his
Lectures on "Principles of Political Obligation" 1931 Edn 82 Rousseau's
theory of sovereignty was designed to bring out that:
there's on earth a yet auguster thing, Veiled though it be, than
Parliament and King.
T. H. Green said : "It is to this 'auguster thing, not to such supreme
power as English lawyers held to be vested in 'Parliament and King',
that Rousseau's account of the sovereign is really applicable.
540.The ideas of Rousseau were subsequently used by Hegelian and Idealist
political philosophers to deify the State as the repository of the "Real Will" of
the people and by Marxists to build their theory of a dictatorship of the
proletariat. But the views of Lock and Montesquieu were sought to be given
a practical form by American Constitution makers who imbued with them,
devised a machinery for the control of sovereign power of the people placed
in the hands of the three organs of State so that it may not be missed.
Suspicion of Governmental power and fear of its misuse, which
characterised liberal democratic thinking, underlay the doctrine of seperation
of powers embodied in the American Constitution.
541. "The merits of democracy", according to Bertrand Russel (See : "Power
: A new Social Analysis" p, 287) "are negative : it does not insure good
Government, but it prevents certain evils." He pointed out (at p. 188):
It is passible, in a democracy, for the majority to exercise a brutal
and wholly unnecessary tyranny over a minority....
The safeguarding of minorities, 90 far as is compatible with orderly
Government is an essential past of the taming of power.
He also said (at p., 192):
Where democracy exists, there is still need to safeguard individuals
and minorities against tyranny, both against tyranny, both because
tyranny is undesirable in itself, and. because it is likely to lead to
breaches of order. Montesquieu's advocacy of the separation of
legislative, executive, and judiciary, the traditional English belief in
checks and balances, Bontham's political doctrines and the whole of
nineteenth] century liberalism, were designed to prevent the
arbitrary exercise of power. But such methods have come to be
considered incompatible with efficiency.
542. Some quite honest, upright, and intelligent people think that the
inefficiency, the corruption, the expense, the waste of time and efforts, and
the delay in accomplishing what they regard as much too urgently needed
socio-economic and cultural transformations of backward peoples today,
involved in treading the democratic path, axe so great that they would
readily sacrifice at least some of the democratic processes and such
safeguards against their misuse as separation of powers and judicial review
are meant to provide. They would not mind taking the risk of falling into the
fire to escape from what they believe to fee a frying pan. Some may even
agree with Bernard Shaw, who liked to look at everything turned upside
down in attempts to understand them, that Democracy, with all its
expensive and time-consumtag accompaniments, is, even in the most
advanced countries, only a method of deluding the mass of the people into
believing that they are the rulers whilst the real power is always enjoyed by
the few who must be judged by the results they produce and not by their
professions. Others regard democracy as the only means of achieving the
highest good and the greatest happiness of the greatest number. They
consider its maintenance to be inextricably bound up with the preservation
of the basic individual freedoms and a supporting mechanism or structure of
checks and balances, separation of powers, and judicial review. What some
believe to be obstacles to any real progress are looked upon by others as
almost sacred institutions essential for the protection of their lives and
liberties, hearths and homes, occupations and means of livelihood, religions,
languages, and cultures. Inevitability of change is, according to some, the
basic and inescapable law of all life, the only questions to be considered
being its pace and direction : how soon or how late and whether the change
is to be for the better or for the worse? "El Dorado", some believe, lies
ahead. Our march towards it, they say, should be orderly and disciplined. To
others all change is anathema as it is generally for the worse. The Golden
Age, some believe, lay in the past. Salvation of mankind, they think, lies in
a return to the imagined pristine virtues of that past, Some assert that
certain amendments of our Constitution have "defaced and defiled" it (See :
Mr. Palkhivala's '"Our Constitution"). Others maintain that these very
amendments have made our Constitution a more potent instrument of those
socio-economic and cultural transformations for which the Constitution was
designed (See : Dr. V.A. Seyid Muhammad's "Our Constitution for Haves or
Havenots?
543. Judges must, no doubt, be impartial and independent. They cannot, in
a period of intensified socio-economic conflicts, either become tools of any
vested interests, or function, from the bench, as zealous reformers
propagating particular course. Nevertheless, they cannot be expected to
have no notions whatsoever of their own, or to have completely blank minds
on important questions indicated above which, though related to law, really
fall outside the realm of law. They cannot dwell in ivory towers or confine
their processes of thinking in some hermetically sealed chambers of purely
legal logic artificially out off from the needs of life around to which law must
respond. Their differing individual philosophies, outlooks, and attitudes on
vital questions, resulting from differences in temperament, education,
tradition, training, interests and experiences in life, will often determine
their honest choices between two or more reasonably possible
interpretations of such words as "amendment" or "constituent power" in the
Constitution. But, on certain clear matters of principle, underlying the
Constitution, no reasonable person could entertain two views as to what was
or could be really intended by the Constitution makers. One of these
matters, clear beyond the region of all doubt, seems to me to be that the
judicial and law making functions, however broadly conceived, could not
possibly have been meant to be interchangeable. They are not incapable of
distinction and differentiation, in any Constitutionally prescribed sphere of
operation of power including that of "constituent power". Each has its own
advantages and disadvantages and its own natural modus operandi.
544. A lamentable example of what took place in the course of English
Constitutional history when a House of Commons, composed of very
intelligent and learned people, one of whom, Holt, subsequently became a
distinguished Chief Justice of England, took upon itself to sit in judgment on
a decision of two Judges of the King's Bench Division, one of whom was
suspected of being a partisan of Royal prerogative and power at a time
when a straggle for supremacy between the competing legal claims of the
King,, as the titular sovereign, and those of the House of Commons, as
representing the people, was still going on. In strict law, which was
unwritten, the position on that problem of power was not quite clear at that
time. The episode is thus described by Lord Denman, C.J., in Stockadale v. Hansard (1839) 112 ER 1112: The next case to which I advert in truth embraced no question of
privilege whatever, but, as one of the highest authorities in the
State has thought otherwise, I shall offer some comments upon it,
1 mean Jay v. Topham 112 How St. Tr. 821. The House of Common s
ordered the defendant, their serjeant-at-arms, to arrest and
imprison the plaintiff for having dared to exercise the common right
of all Englishmen, of presenting a petition to the King on the state
of public affairs, at a time when no Parliament existed. For this
imprisonment an action was brought. The declaration complained,
not only of the personal trespass, but also of extortion of the
plaintiffs money practised by defendant under colour of the
Speaker's warrant. The pica of justification under that warrant,
which could not possibly authorise the extortion, even if it could the
arrest, was overruled by this Court, no doubt with the utmost
propriety, for the law was clear; Lord Ellenborough. points this out
in the most forcible manner in 14 East. 109. Yet for this righteous
judgment C.J. Pemberton and one of his brethren were summoned
before the Convention Parliament, when they vindicated their
conduct by unanswerable reasoning, but were, notwithstanding,
committed to the prison of Newgate for the remainder of the
session. Our respect and gratitude to the Convention Parliament
ought not to blind us to the fact that this sentence of imprisonment
was as unjust and tyrannical as any of those acts of arbitrary power
for which they deprived King James of his Crown. It gave me real
pain to hear the Attorney-General contend that the two Judges
merited the foul indignity they underwent, as they had acted
corruptly in concert with the Duke of York. In support of this novel
charge, he produced no evidence, nor any other reason but that the
plea, as set out in Nelson's Abridgement (a), appears to have been
in bar, and not to the jurisdiction. But the Commons, who knew
their own motive's, made no such charge : the record produced
there, on law, exhibits a bad plea for the reasons assigned by Lord
Ellenborough, and the judgment punished by the Commons could
not have been different without a desertion of duty by the Judges.
[(a) 2 Nels. Abr. 1248. The plea there is that pleaded, not in Jay v. Topham,
but in Verdon v. Topham. Section 14 East, 102 Note (a).]
545. In Stockdale v. Hansard (1839) 112 ER 1112 (supra) the action of the
House of Common s, on Jay v. Topham, 112 How St Tr 821 (supra), was
practically declared to be illegal or unconstitutional for arbitrariness. The
sovereign British Parliament, however, did not alter but has acquiesced in
the law as stated by Lord Denman who pointed out, by references to a
number of precedents, that Common Law courts had continuously been
determining questions relating to the very existence of an alleged privilege
and defining its orbit on claims based on the ground of a Parliamentary
privilege. And, English Courts have gone on doing this unhesitatingly after
Stockdale v. Hansard (supra), just as they had done earlier, as a part of
their function and duty to interpret and declare the law as it exists.
546. Let me go back a little further to the time when another English Chief
Justice, Sir Edward Coke, who, on being summoned, with his brother
Judges, by King James the 1st, to answer why the King could not himself
decide cases which had to go before his own Courts of justice, asserted:
x x x x no King after the conquest assumed to himself to give any
judgment in any cause whatsoever, which concerned the
administration of justice within this realm, but these were solely
determined in the Courts of Justice.
When the King said that "he thought the law was founded on reason, and
that he and others had reason, as well as the Judges", Coke answered:
True it was, that God had endowed his Majesty with excellent
science, and great endowments of nature, but his Majesty was not
learned in the laws of his realm of England, and causes which
concern the life, or inheritance, or goods or fortunes of his subjects,
are not to be decided by natural reason, but by the artificial reason
and judgment of the law, which law is an act which requires long
study and experience, before that a man can attain to the
cognizance of it, and that the law was the golden metwand and
measure to try the causes of the subjects, and which protected his
Majesty in safety and peace.
(The "Higher Law" background of American Constitutional law by Edward S. Corwin p. 38-39). 547. We know that Coke even advanced the claim, in Bonham's case (1610)
8 Co. Rep 118 A that Courts could invalidate acts of Parliament if they
contravened rules of natural justice such as that a man shall not be heard
before he is condemned or that he should be a Judge in his own cause. As
Ivor Jennings points out, in an appendix to "The Law and the Constitution"
(5th Edn. 1959 p. 318) the theory of Parliamentary sovereignty or
supremacy could, by no means, be said to be firmly established in England
in Coke's time.
548. Blackstone, while enunciating the theory of Parliamentary sovereignty
in the 19th century, as it was to be later expounded in the 20th century by
Prof. A. V. Dicey, also claimed superiority for "the law of nature which was
common  to all mankind". He said about this law:
It is binding over all the globe, in all countries, and at all time; no
human laws are of any validity if contrary to this, and such of them
as are valid derive all their force and all their authority, mediately or
immediately, from this original.
(See : Dicey-Law of the Constitution p. 62).
549. It is a matter of legal and Constitutional history that English Judges
finally rejected claims based upon vague philosophical concepts or upon a
law of nature or appeals to the "yet auguster thing" pitted against statutory
law except in so far as certain rules of natural justice and reason could
impliedly be read into acts of Parliament due to absence of statutory
prohibition and the need to observe them having regard to the character of
the function required by a statute to be performed. Constitutional historians,
such as Holdsworth, have pointed out how English Common Lawyers, some
presiding as Judges over King's Courts of Justice, others sitting in Parliament
as Legislators, joined hands to evolve, sustain, and give life to principles of
"Sovereignty of Parliament" and the "Rule of Law" as understood by them.
Dicey asserted, in his "Law of the Constitution", that both these principles so
operated as to reinforce each other instead of coming into conflict with each
other. One wonders whether this could be said of later times when the need
for more rapid transformations of social and economic orders, in an effort to
build up a welfare State in Britain, led to serious curtailments of what were
at one time considered natural and inviolable rights and to adoption of
legislative devices such as Henry VIIIth clause. We know that these
developments evoked a powerful protest from a Chief Justice of England,
Lord Hewart, who wrote a book on the subject : "New Despotism". today,
however, it cannot be said that the Courts of justice in England do not see
the implications of a welfare Socialistic State which may demand the
curtailment of liberties of subjects in many directions in order that the
substance of democratic freedom, only attainable through removal of
economic, social, and educational disparities and barriers, may be attained.
550. Willis, dealing with the development of American Constitutional Law,
wrote about the claim of Coke, mentioned above, to invalidate Acts of
Parliament by reference to certain fundamental principles of natural justice
and of common  law (See Willis on Constitutional Law-Edn. 1936 p. 76):
This dictum of Coke, announced in Dr. Monham's case (1610) 8 Co.
Rep. 118-A was soon repudiated in England, but the doctrine
announced in Coke's dictum found fertile soil in the United States
and sprouted into such a vigorous growth that it was applied by the
United States Supreme Court in the decision of cases coming before
it, and it has been said that the doctrine of the supremacy of the
Supreme Court is the logical conclusion of Coke's doctrine of control
of the Courts over legislation.
551. It seems to me that judicial review of all law making, whether it
appertains to the sphere of fundamental law or of ordinary Jaw, is traceable
to this doctrine of judicial control by reference to certain basic principles,
contained in a Constitution and considered too inviolable to be easily
alterable. It may be that this doctrine is unsuitable for our country at a time
when it is going through rapid socio-economic transformation. Nevertheless,
so long as the doctrine is found embodied in our Constitution, we cannot
refuse to recognise it.
552. In America, there was some doubt whether the doctrine of judicial
review of all legislation naturally flowed out of the vesting of judicial power
by Section 1 of Article 3 of their Constitution which says:
The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one
Supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may,
from time to time, ordain and establish.
(Willis on Constitutional Law-p. 1020). There is no article there, like Article
13 of our Constitution, which declared any kind of legislation abridging or
taking away fundamental rights to be "void". The doubt was not without
substance. It was removed by Chief Justice Marshall whose judgment in
Marbury v. Madison 1803 Cranch 137 firmly established the doctrine of
judicial review and the supremacy of the Supreme Court of America, in the
judicial field of interpretation, as the mouthpiece of the Constitution, and,
therefore, of the "Real Will" of the people themselves. The Constitution, as
the basic or fundamental law of the land, was to operate there as the
touchstone of the validity of ordinary laws just as the validity of laws made
by British colonial legislatures was tested by reference to the parental Act of
the British Parliament.
553. Under our Constitution, by Article 141 of the Constitution, power is
vested only in the Supreme Court and in no other organ 01 authority of the
Republic to declare the law "which shall be binding on all Courts within the
territory of India." Article 143 of the Constitution of India also shows that
whenever questions of fact or law have either arisen or are likely to arise,
the President of India may, in view of their public importance, seek the
opinion of the Supreme Court, by a reference made to the Court. The
procedure on such a reference is that of a judicial authority which hears
those interested and then gives its opinion. Article 32 of the Constitution
gives a wide power to the Supreme Court "to issue directions or orders or
writs", which is larger than that of the British Courts issuing prerogative
writs, although it is confined to the enforcement of the rights conferred by
part 3 dealing with fundamental rights. The power of the High Courts of the
various States under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue appropriate
directions, orders or writs "to any person or authority including in
appropriate cases any Government", within the territories under its
jurisdiction, extends to "any other purpose", that is to say, to purposes
other than enforcement of fundamental rights. Article 227 also contains the
power of a High Court to superintend the functioning of "all Courts and
Tribunals" within its jurisdiction. These powers of the High Courts are
subject to appeals to the Supreme Court, which is also a repository of a
special jurisdiction under Article 136 to grant special leave to appeal "from
any judgment,. decree, determination sentence or order in any cause or
matter passed or made by any Court or Tribunal in the territory of India." It
is true that there is no mention or vesting of judicial power, as such, in the
Supreme Court by any Article of our Constitution, but, can it be denied that
what vests in the Supreme Court and High Courts is really judicial power '?
The Constitution undoubtedly specifically vests such power, that is to say,
power which can properly be described as "judicial power, only in the
Supreme Court and in the High Courts and not in any other bodies or
authorities, whether executive or legislative, functioning under the
Constitution. Could such a vesting of power in Parliament have been omitted
if it was the intention of Constitution makers to clothe it also with any
similar judicial authority or functions in any capacity whatsoever?
554. The claim, therefore, that an amalgam or some undifferentiated
residue of inherent power, incapable of precise definition and including
judicial power, vests in Parliament in its role as a constituent authority,
cannot be substantiated by a reference to any Article of the Constitution
whatsoever, whether substantive or procedural. Attempts are made to infer
such a power from mere theory and speculation as to the nature of the
"Constituent power" itself. I do not think that, because the constituent
power necessarily carries with it the power to constitute judicial authorities,
it must also, by implication, mean that the Parliament, acting in its
constituent capacity, can exercise the judicial power, itself directly without
vesting it in itself first by an amendment of the Constitution. The last
mentioned objection may appear to be procedural only, but, as a matter of
correct interpretation of the Constitution, and, even more so, from the point
of view of correct theory and principle, from which no practice should depart
without good reason, it is highly important.
555. This impels me to consider such theories of sovereignty as we may find
embedded in our Constitution. The term "sovereign" is only used in the
preamble of our Constitution, which says:
We, the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute
India into a Sovereign Democratic Republic and to secure to all its
citizens.
In our Constituent Assembly this twenty-sixth day of November,
1949, do hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this
Constitution.
556. This Court, exercising the powers vested in it under the Constitution to
declare the law of the land, cannot go behind the clear words of the
Constitution on such a matter. We have to presume that the Constitution
was actually made by the people of India by virtue of their political-
sovereignty which enabled them to create a legally Sovereign Democratic
Republic to which they consigned or entrusted, through the Constitution, the
use of sovereign power to be exercised, in its different forms, by the three
different organs of Government, each acting on behalf of the whole people,
so as to serve the objects stated in the Preamble. This reference to "the
people of India" is much more than a legal fiction. It is an assertion in the
basic legal instrument for the governance of this country of the fact of a new
political power. The legal effect of the terms of the instrument is another
matter.
557. It has been pointed out in the Kesva-nanda Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , that the preamble of our
Constitution did not, like that of the American Constitution, "walk before the
Constitution", but was adopted after the rest of the Constitution was passed
so that it is really a part of the Constitution itself. It means that the
Constitution is a document recording an act of entrustment and conveyance
by the people of India, the political sovereign, of legal authority to act on its
behalf to a "Sovereign Democratic Republic." "This Constitution" has a basic
structure comprising the three organs of the Republic the Executive, the
Legislature, and the Judiciary. It is through each of these organs that the
Sovereign Will of the People has to operate and manifest itself and not
through only one of them. Neither of these three separate organs of the
Republic can take over the function assigned to the other. This is the basic
structure or scheme of the system of Government of the Republic laid down
in this Constitution whose identity cannot, according to the majority view in
Kesvananda's case (supra) be changed even by resorting to Article 368. It
necessarily follows, from such a view, that Sovereignty, as the power of
taking ultimate or final decisions on broad politico-legal issues involved in
any proposed changes in the law, becomes divisible. The people are not
excluded from the exercise of it. They participate in ail the operations of the
Republic through the organs of the State. They bind themselves to exercise
their individual and collective rights and powers only in the ways sanctioned
and through agencies indicated by the Constitution. The Republic is
controlled and directed by the Constitution to proceed towards certain
destinations and for certain purposes only. The power to change even the
direction and purposes is itself divided in the sense that a proposed change,
if challenged, must be shown to have the sanction of all the three organs of
the Republic, each applying its own methods and principles and procedure
for testing the correctness or validity of the measure. This result, whether
we like it or not, necessarily follows from our present Constitutional
structure and scheme. If the judicial power operates here like a brake 01 a
veto, it is not one which can be controlled by any advice or direction to the
judiciary as is the case in totalitarian regimes. In our system, which is
democratic, its exercise is left to the judicial conscience of each individual
judge. This is also a basic and distinguishing feature of democracy as Prof.
Friedman indicated in his "Law in a Changing Society" (p. 61) quoted by me
in Kesvananda Bharti's case (supra) at p. 859. 558. In Kesvananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , I had approvingly quoted the views of Prof. Ernest Barker, who, in his "Social
and Political Theory", claiming to be elaborating the theory underlying the
preamble to our own Constitution, pointed out that, inasmuch as the
Constitution is the instrument which regulates the distribution between and
exercise of sovereign power, by the three organs of the State, and it is there
constantly to govern and to be referred to and to be appealed to in any and
every case of doubt and difficulty, it could itself, conceptually, be regarded
as the true or "ultimate" sovereign, that is to say, Sovereign as compared
with "immediate" sovereignty of an organ of the Republic acting within its
own sphere and at its own level.
559. Of course, inasmuch as the power of altering every feature of the
Constitution remains elsewhere politically, the Constitution is neither the
ultimate "political" sovereign nor a legally unalterable and absolute
sovereign. All Constitutional and "legal" sovereigns are necessarily
restrained and limited sovereigns. I thought and still think that such a
working theory should be acceptable to lawyers, particularly as the
dignitaries of State, including Judges of superior Courts, and all the
legislators, who have to take oaths prescribed by the Third Schedule of our
Constitution, swear "allegiance" to the Constitution as though the
documents itself is a personal Ruler. This accords with our own ancient
notions of the law as "The King of Kings" and the majesty of all that it
stands for : The Rightfulness of the Ends as well as of the Means.
560. The theory outlined above would, of course, be unacceptable if
sovereignty must necessarily be indivisible and located in a determinate
living person or persons...a really medieval concept which is not generally
employed today even to describe the titular hereditary monarchs as
"sovereigns", although the dictionaries may still give the derivative meaning
of "sovereign" as the human ruler. Modern theories of even political
sovereignty advanced by the Pluralist School e.g. Gierke, Duguit, Mc lver,
Laski...look upon it as divisible and not as absolute and unlimited. Indeed,
they go to the extent of practically denuding sovereignty of all its customary
connotations. Duguit abandons "sovereignty" as an obsolescent doctrine and
displaces it by the ruling principle of "social solidarity." Mc. Iyer thinks that
the traditional concept of sovereignty, dominated too long by legalistic
Austinian views, needs to be discarded. His conclusion is that the State, with
which doctrine of sovereignty has been bound up, is "the association of
associations", merely regulates "principles of association" or relations
between individuals and associations in the interests of Society as a whole.
He wrote:
At any moment the State is more the official guardian than the
maker of the law. Its chief task is no uphold the rule of law, and this
implies that it is itself also the subject of law, that it is bound in the
system of legal values which it maintains.
(See : R.M. Mac Iyer : "The Modern State" p. 478).
Laski, while mainly accepting this rather negative approach, reminiscent of
19th century Liberalism, would accord the State a much more positive role
in the interests not only of social order but also of socio-economic
engineering and progress.
561. Marxists, who saw in the State and its laws and all institutions
supporting an existing social order, the means of oppression and exploitation
of the mass of the people, dreamt of the "withering away" of the State with
its claims to 'Sovereignty'. But, the Russian Revolution was followed by the
vastly increased powers of the State run for the benefit of the proletariat.
Nevertheless, the Constitution of the U.S.S.R. guarantees to citizens not
merely fundamental rights, including the right to work, but has a special
department of the Procurator General to enforce due observance of legality,
according to the law of the Constitution, by all the functionaries of State.
Article 104 of their Constitution reads:
104. The Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. is the highest judicial
organ. The Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. is charged with the
supervision of the judicial activities of all the judicial organs of the
U.S.S.R. and of the Union Republic within the limits established by
law.
(See : A Denisov, M. Kirichenko, Soveit State-Law, p. 400).
562. It is true that legality is enforced in the U.S.S.R. not merely through
the organs of the State but the vigilance of the Communist Party which
consists of selected persons keeping a watch on the policy of the State. A.Y.
Vyshinski, however, explained (See : Fundamental Tasks of Soviet Law
1938) that Soveit "law can no more be reduced simply to policy than cause
can be identified with effect." Strict observance of "Socialist Legality", under
the supremacy of the Constitution, is entrusted to the care of the State, with
its three organs, the Communist Party, and the people of the U.S.S.R. (See :
"The Soviet Legal System" by M/s. John N. Howard and Issac Shapiro).
Although, Article 15 of the Constitution of the U.S.S.R. speaks of the
"Sovereignty" and "Sovereign Rights" of the Union Republics, yet, it is made
clear that these Republics function subject to the supremacy of the
Constitution. Hence, the supremacy of the Constitution is a principle
recognised by the Constitution of the U.S. S.R. also as operating above and
limited the Sovereignties of the Socialist Republics.
563. Gierke made a wide survey and a penetrating analysis of juristic
thinking, up to the end of the 19th century, on sovereignty, derived, on the
one hand, from theories of the sovereignty of the Ruler, and, on the other,
from theories of popular sovereignty. He observed : (See : "Natural Law and
Theory of Society" by Otto Gierke translated by Ernest Barker, Vol. I, p. 153)
about the approach of Kant:
Kant sketches, indeed, an ideal Constitutional State in which
popular sovereignty is nominally present, but no living 'subject' of
supreme authority is anywhere really to be found in this State. The
'bearers' of the different powers (legislative, executive and judicial)
are supposed to govern, but each is subject to strict legal obligation
appropriate to its own sphere, and over them allas the Sovereign
proper, the abstract Law of Reason is finally enthroned.
He concluded (at p. 153):
The history of the theory of Constitutionalism shows how a doctrine
derived from the principle of popular sovereignty could produce
almost the same results as the other (and apparently opposite)
system of thought which started from the principle of the
sovereignty of the Ruler. In the one case, just as in the other, the
inviolability of sovereignty, and the unity of the personality of the
State are sacrificed in order to attain the possibility of Constitutional
law which is binding even on the Sovereign.
564. A theory of a "Legal Sovereignty' must necessarily demarcate the
sphere of its "legal" or proper operation as opposed to mere use of power
either capriciously or divorced from human reason and natural justice.
Ernest Barker 's statement of it, quoted by me in Kesavananda's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , seemed to me to satisfy this
requirement. After pointing out that Sovereignty, by which I understand one
recognised by law, is limited both by its own "nature" as well as its "mode of
action", it concludes : at pp. 867-868 (of SCR) : at p. 1973 of AIR:
Sovereignty moves within the circle of the legal association, and
only within that circle it decides upon questions of a legal order, and
only upon those questions. Moving within that circle, and deciding
upon those questions, sovereignty will only make legal
pronouncements, and it will make them according to regular rules
or legal procedure. It is not a capricious power of doing anything in
any way : it is a legal power of settling finally legal questions in a
legal way." There should be no difficulty in. accepting such a theory
if one can conceive of an ordered system or "Government of laws
'as opposed to a "Government of men" placed beyond limitations of
this kind. At any rate, it is implicit in the very idea of a Constitution.
Our Constitution not only regulates the operations of the organs of
State but symbolises the unity of the Republic and contains the
inspiring hopes and aspirations and cherished goals of all the efforts
of the nation. It operates not merely through the law but also on
the minds and feelings of the people.
565. Prof. Willis, in his "Constitutional Law of the United States" advocates
the doctrine of "sovereignty of the People" for which he finds support in
Abraham Lincoln's well known description of the American system as "a
Government of the people, for the people, by the people" as well as in a
number of pronouncements of the American Supreme Court. After
considering and rejecting a whole host of theories of political philosphers
and jurists, including those of Bodin, Hegel, Hooker, Hobbes, Locke,
Rousseau, Fichte, Kant, Austin, Brown, Dicey, Willoughby, Duguit, and Laski,
he opines : (at p. 51):
As Dewey says, the forces which determine the Government are
sovereign. The effective social forces are not the Union, nor the
States, nor the oligarchy of States, nor the organs of Government,
nor the Constitution, nor natural law, but those forces which
created these organisations and agents and institutions, and to
whom they are all ultimately responsible.
Accor ding to him, the "Sovereignty of the People" which he advocates does
not mean an anarchic license given to each individual or group to do as he
or it pleases, but stands for the power of the people, "organised in
Government to express and adjust their will either directly or through
representatives". He explains, in the rest of his work, how the Government
of the U.S. A., in the broader sense of all that social control which, operating
through the three departments of State, has to take place in accordance
with the Constitution. This concept of a nation "organised in Government"
appears to me to clearly introduce the idea of a Constitution which lays
down what that organisation is and how it must operate. Although Prof.
Willis rejects the view that the Constitution is "Sovereign", because it can be
altered by the people, he is obliged to accept something resembling it
because he sees that the "people", thought of as a mere aggregation or an
amorphous mass, is too nebulous. Any satisfactory theory of sovereignty
must account for the power of the people to act in certain ways or to move
in certain directions. A 'hydra-headed' multitude or mass of people will not
know how to act or in which direction to move. It is its "Organisation" which
provides that. And, its effort to organise itself and to rationalise will produce
a Constitution for it which embodies its will as organised in the form of a
Government. The will of the people is thus inseparable from a Constitution
which enables it to be expressed and then to govern. The Constitution
neither is nor can be sovereign in the sense that the people who made it
cannot unmake it or change it. It only prescribes the correct mode of doing
everything, including that of changing the very system of Govt. It is only in
this sense that it can be "Sovereign" or "Supreme" and rule the life of a
nation.
566. Another American writer, Willoughby, has put forward the view that
sovereignty, as an attribute of the State, conceived of as a juristic entity
apart from.. its governmental organs, cannot be legally limited. According to
him, to limit it is to destroy it He says (See : Willoughby on "Fundamental
Concepts of Public Law-Tagore Law Lectures, 1924, at p. 77) : "There would
seem to be no more value in attaching legal rights and duties to the
sovereign State than there is in predicating the attributes of goodness and
justice of a Divine Being who is regarded as Himself the creator, by His own
unrestrained will, of all distinctions between goodness and badness". But,
this seems more a metaphysical than a realistic, more amoral Hobbes-
Machiavellian than a Dante-Gandhian stance. If one's concepts of the Divine
Being are to be introduced into law, one could refer to those also which see
Divinity only in that order and that law which seems to pervade and govern
the whole physical world and the universe. Indeed, there are judicial dicta to
the effect that God Himself considered Himself bound by those elementary
principles of justice whose love was planted in man by him. In Cooper v.
Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C. B. (N. S.) 180 Byles, J., observed:
The laws of God and man both give the party an opportunity to
make his defence, if he has any. I remember to have heard it
observed by a very learned man, upon such an occasion, that even
God himself did not pass sentence upon Adam before he was called
upon to make his defence. 'Adam' (says God), 'where art thou?
Hast thou not eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that
thou shouldest not eat7 And the same question was put to Eve also.
567. It is clear that no simple theory of sovereignty fits the complex facts of
modern life. Every theory of today, ultimately, rests on concepts more
refined than the physical or spiritual might of some ruler, in whom
executive, legislative, and judicial powers coalesce to take away all legal
distinctions between them. Even if that was ever the concept of sovereignty
anywhere, it was certainly not that of our Constitution makers and it is not
ours today. Even Willoughby, dealing with Constitutionalism (Willoughby on
"Nature of the State" 1928, at p. 302) says : "the value of Constitutional
Government is not that places sovereignty in the hands of the people, but
that it prescribes definite ways in which this sovereign power shall be
exercised by the State". Hence, he too admits that the Constitution does
place some limitation on exercise of sovereign power. That seems to me to
be the essence of a Constitution and the rationale of its existence.
568. Still another American writer, Orfield, in the course of his discussion
(see : "The Amending of the Federal Constitution" by Lester B. Orfield
1971), of a number of concepts of sovereignty seems sometimes to almost
consider Article 5 of the American Constitution, containing the constitutent
power and its procedure, to be sovereign. He concludes his discussion on
the subject as follows (at p. 166):
Each part of the amending body is subject to law, and may be
altered or abolished. The amending body itself may be altered
through the amending process, and limitations on the future
amending capacity may be imposed. The amending body is an
artificial sovereign deriving its being from a law in the form of
Article Five. The amending groups hold office for but a short time,
and may be supplanted by others in the elections in which an
increasingly larger electorate participates. The theory of
sovereignty, moreover, presupposes the continued orderly existence
of the Government. In case of a revolution the commands of the
sovereign would be disregarded, and authority could no longer be
ascribed to the amending body either in fact or in law. The moral,
religious, physical, and other factual limitations on the supposed
sovereign are so important that it may perhaps be correct to say
that they are also legal limitations, as there comes a time when law
and fact shade into one another. Finally, when it is remembered that
throughout all history, American as well as European, there never
has been a consensus as to the meaning of sovereignty, it seems
that the term should be used only with the greatest circumspection.
He rejects the concept of sovereignty of the people as too vague and
meaningless. And, for the reasons given above, he rejects the theory of a
sovereignty of the amending body. His final conclusion seems to be that it is
better to avoid altogether entanglement in the concept of sovereignty. This
view, however, overlooks the fact that lawyers need a working theory of
sovereignty to be able to decide legal questions before them. As between
the sovereignty of the amending Article and the sovereignty of the
Constitution there should be little doubt that lawyers should and would
prefer the sovereignty or supremacy of the whole Constitution rather than of
any part of it. On the face of it, it appears more reasonable and respectable
to swear allegience to the whole Constitution, as we actually do, rather than
to Article 368 or to the amending powers contained in it. If there is a part of
our Constitution which deserves greater devotion than any other part of it, it
is certainly the preamble to our Constitution.
568 A. The American Supreme Court, in the context of the especially
American conditions and needs, after leaning sometimes towards a
recognition of "State Sovereignty" (See : Ware v. Hylton (1876) 3 Dall 199;
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1856) 19 How 393) and at others towards a
recognition of the dual system of Government which has prevailed in
America (See : e.g. Gibbus v. Ogden (1824) 9 Wheat 1) has on the whole
opted for the "Sovereignty of the People" which unifies the nation (See : e.g. White v. Heart (1871) 13 Wall 646; Keith v. Clark (1878) 97 US 454; National Prohibition cases (1920) 253 US 350.
569. I cannot, while I am on the subject of American conditions, resist the
temptation to quote the trenchant comments of Prof. Willis on what he
considers to be the dangers of the American system of Government. He
wrote (at pp. 68-69).
But the greatest danger in popular sovereignty does not lie in the
intellectual field, but in the moral. While our intellectual level is not
as high as it ought to be, our moral level is much lower than it can
safely be if our form of Government is to endure permanently.
Millions of our citizens are already members of the criminal class.
Millions of other citizens who are not yet members of the criminal
class are in the economic world doing things just as bad as the
things which members of the criminal class are doing. Millions of
our people are concerned with their own selfish interests instead of
the common  good. Millions of our citizens are only too ready to ruin
themselves and the rest of our people physically, intellectually, and
morally by drugs and intoxicating liquors and vices. Our people do
not seem to be much concerned with high ideals in any of the fields
of human endeavour. Our people as a whole do not seem to be
seriously concerned with social planning for the purpose of
obtaining an ideal social order. They are more interested in rotation
in office than they are in good Government. They are more
interested in winning law suits than in ideal system for the
administration of justice. They are more interested in making
fortunes in the practice of medicine than in the prevention of
disease. They are more interested in profits in the business world
than they are in a well-planned system of business organisation
adapted to the needs of our social order. They are more interested
in individualism than they are in collective planning for the good of
all.
The effects of the moral standards of our people are already
manifest. As a result of our political and economic theories, there
has developed a concentration of wealth unparalleled in human
history. While on the whole the economic level is comparatively high
in the United States, the difference between the wealth of the many
and that of the few is startling. One-fourth of the families in the
United States before the depression had incomes of less than $ 500
and two-thirds of the families in the United States incomes of less
than  1,000. while 2 per cent of our population owned 65 per cent
of the wealth. There were four men any one of whom had an
income as large as five million of the poorest people in the United
States. This concentration of wealth was probably one of the
primary causes of the depression, and the depression has
threatened our capitalistic system. This only shows the danger
inherent in our political organisation.
570. If the people of an advanced country like the U.S.A., left entirely to the
concept of popular sovereignty, have revealed the need for a more positive
guiding or moulding role of their State so as to overcome the dangers
adverted to by Prof. Willis, how much greater are the needs of a people
potentially so great but actually so backward economically and educationally
as ours, taken en masse, still are? Our concepts of sovereignty must accord
with the needs of the people of our country. Our Constitution, which has
been described by G. Austin as "the cornerstone of the Nation", was devised
as a means to serve those needs. It has not only the elevating preamble,
deserving the allegiance of every rational human being, but, unlike the
American Constitution, the whole of Part IV of our Constitution which
contains "Directive Principles of State Policy" to guide the future course of
State action particularly in the legislative field. It is true that provisions of
Part IV are not enforceable through the Courts against the State, but they
are declared as fundamental in the governance of the country and are used
to interpret the Constitution and to fix its meaning. I think, from this point
of view also, we can say that the concept of the Supremacy of the
Constitution is, undoubtedly, more suited to the needs of our country than
any other so far put forward. It not only places before us the goals towards
which the nation must march but it is meant to compel our Sovereign
Republic, with its three organs of Government to proceed in certain
directions. It assumes that each organ of State will discharge its trust
faithfully. Can we deny it that supremacy which is the symbol and proof of
the level of our civilisation?
571. I find that the doctrine of the supremacy or sovereignty of the
Constitution was adopted by a Bench of seven learned Judges of this Court
in Special Reference No. 1 of (sic) where Gajendragadkar, C.J., speaking for
six learned Judges of this Court, said at p. 446 of SCR :
In a democratic country governed by a written Constitution, it is the
Constitution which is supreme and sovereign. It is no doubt true
that the Constitution itself can be amended by the Parliament, but,
that is possible because Article 368 of the Constitution itself makes
a provision in that behalf, and the amendment of the Constitution
can be validly made only by following the procedure prescribed by
the said article. That shows that even when the Parliament purports
to amend the Constitution, it has to comply with the relevant
mandate of the Constitution itself. Legislators, Ministers, and Judges
all take oath of allegiance to the Constitution, for it. is by the
relevant provisions of the Constitution that they derive their
authority and jurisdiction and it is to the provisions of the
Constitution that they owe allegiance. ' therefore, there can be no
doubt that the sovereignty which can be claimed by the Parliament
in England, cannot be claimed by any Legislature in India in the
literal absolute sense.
572. The principle of the supremacy of the Constitution was then declared
by the majority of the learned Judges of this Court in Kesvananda's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 to be a part of the basic structure
of the Constitution. The minority opinion, while not specifically dissenting
from this view, was that even what was considered by the majority to be a
part of "basic structure" was alterable under Article 368. But, no Judge of
this Court has so far held that, without even attempting to change what may
be the basic structure of Constitution itself, by appropriate amendments,
judicial power could be exercised by Parliament under Article 368 on the
assumption that it was already there.
573. M. C. Setalvad, a distinguished jurist of India, said (See : "The
Common  Law of India" Hamlyn Lectures-12th series-1960) (at pp. 174-
175):
The Constitution divides the functions of the Union into the three
categories of executive, legislative and judicial functions following
the pattern of the British North America Act and the Commonwealth
of Australia Act. Though this division of functions is not based on
the doctrine of separation of powers as in the United States yet
there is a broad division of functions between the appropriate
authorities so that, for example, the legislature will not be entitled
to arrogate to itself the judicial function of adjudication. 'The Indian
Constitution has not indeed recognised the doctrine of separation of
powers in its absolute rigidity but the functions of the different parts
or branches of the Government have been sufficiently differentiated
and consequently it can very well be said that our Constitution does
not contemplate assumption, by one organ or part of the State, of
functions that essentially belong to another', (See : Rai Saheb R.J. Kapur v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0011/1955 : [1955]2SCR225 . This will no doubt strike one accustomed to the established
supremacy of Parliament in England as unusual. In the course of its
historical development Parliament has performed and in a way still
performs judicial functions. Indeed the expression 'Court of
Parliament' is not unfamiliar to English lawyers. However, a
differentiation of the functions of different departments is an
invariable feature of all written Constitutions. The very purpose of a
written Constitution is the demarcation of the powers of different
departments of Government so that the exercise of their powers
may be limited to their particular fields. In countries governed by a
written Constitution, as India is, the supreme authority is not
Parliament but the Constitution. Contrasting it with the supremacy
of Parliament, Dicey has characterised it as the supremacy of the
Constitution.
574. A.V. Dicey, the celebrated propounder of the doctrine of the
sovereignty of Parliament, had critized Austin for frequently mixing up "legal
sovereignty and "political sovereingty"(See Law of the Constitution by A.V.
Dicey-10th Edn. 72), He contrasted the British principle of "parliamentary
sovereignty''with what was described by him the "Supremacy of the
Constitution" in America. He observed (at p. 165).
But, if their notions were conceptions derived from English law, the
great statesman of America gave to old ideas a perfectly new
expansion and for the first time in the history of the world formed a
Constitution which should in strictness be 'the law of the land', and
in so doing created modern federalism. For the essential
characteristics of federalism-the supremacy of the Constitution-the
distribution of powers-the authority of the judiciary -reappear,
though no doubt with,modifications, in every true federal state.
He said (at p. 144):
A federal state derives its existence from the Constitution, just as a
corporation derives its existence from the grant by which it is
created. Hence every power, executive, legislative, or judicial,
whether it belongs to the nation or to the individual States, is
subordinate to and controlled by the Constitution.
He wrote about the American Supreme Court (at p. 159):
Of the nature and position of the Supreme Court itself itself this
much alone need for our present purpose be noted. The court
drives its existence from the Constitution, and stands therefore on
an equality with the President and with Congress, the members
thereof (in common  with every Judge of the Federal Judiciary) hold
their places during good behavior, at salaries which cannot be
diminished during a judge's tenure of office.
575. The theory of the Supremacy of the Constitution is thus not a new one
at all. It is inherent in the very concept of "the auguster thing" which lies
behind Parliament or king and is sought to be embodied in the Constitution
of a country. The Judges, who are vested with the authority and charged
with the duty to uphold the Constitution, do so as the mouthpieces of what
has been called the "Real will" of the people themselves by political
philosophers such as Bosanquet. That, as I have indicated earlier, is the
theory underlying the system of judicial review. Such a system may delay
changes but should not, I think, speaking entirely for myself deny or defeat
the right of the people to bring about any change, whether basic or not, in
the Constitution. Indeed, in Kesavananda's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 , I indicated that I thought that the most proper and
appropriate function of the amending power in a Constitution, which is also
a part of the Constitution, and, indeed, its most potent part-was that of
making basic changes so as to avert Constitutional break downs and
revolutions if possible. However, we are precluded from acting upon such a
broad view of amending power in this case as we are bound by the majority
opinion in Kesvananda's case (supra) that implied limitations of "a basic
structure", operating from even outside the language of Article 368, as it
stood before the 24th amendment, restrict its scope. These limitations must
however, be related to provisions of the Constitution.
576. It has not been argued before us that the introduction by the 24th
amendment of the new Clause (1) in Article 368, containing the "constituent
power", itself amplifies or increases the contents or changes the character of
the power in Article 368 by making it a composite power so as to include a
new type of judicial or quasi-judicial power also within its fold now. It is
evident from the judgments of learned Judges of this Court in Golaknath's
case MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762 that possible distinctions
between amending power and "constituent power" and "Sovereign power"
figured prominently in arguments in that case. Wanchoo, J., in his minority
opinion said that it was not necessary, for the purpose of that case, to
decide whether the am ending power was as wide as the "sovereign power
of the Constituent Assembly which had framed our Constitution. After all the
discussion that had taken place then, came the 24th amendment. It does
not use the words "sovereignty" or "sovereign power". I presume that the
words "constituent power" were advisedly used in it. so as to clarify the
position and not to put in or to include anything beyond Constitution making
power in Article 368.
577. The "constituent power" is still bound by the exclusively prescribed
procedure to "amend by way of addition, variation, or repeal" any provision
of the Constitution. It is entirely a law making procedure elaborately set out
in Clause (2). In fact, Article 368 contains so much of the fundamental law
making or legislative procedure that five judges of this Court, led by Subba Rao, C.J. opined in Golaknath's case MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762 , that it was confined to procedure and did not contain at all the substantive
power to amend. Clause (1) of Article 368, introduced by the 24th
amendment, was, apparently, meant to remove this objection and to do no
more. It could not be intended to pour some new amalgam of executive and
judicial or quasi-judicial substantive powers into it also by some implication
so its to do away with the very need for such an elaborate and carefully
drawn up Constitution such as ours. The absence of any quasi-judicial
procedure, from the comprehensively framed procedural provisions of Article
368, seems extremely significant. It indicates that it was the clear intention
of Constitution-makers that no judicial or quasi-judicial function could be
performed by Parliament whilst operating in the special Constituent field of
law making. An omission to provide any quasi-judicial procedure in Article
368, which, apparently, furnishes a self-contained code, means that no such
power was meant to be included here at all. Proper exercise of judicial
power is inseparable from appropriate procedure.
578. Learned Counsel supporting the 39th Amendment tried to find the
meaning of "constituent power" in theoretical speculations about the
meaning of "the sovereignty of the people", on the one hand, and the
sovereignty of the medieval monarch on the other, instead of looking to the
legislature history of the "constituent power". I have, therefore, also
referred to some of these theories and practices from ancient times so as to
be able to indicate the precise significance or relevance of various concepts
and decisions placed before us. These theories and practices could have only
an indirect bearing on the meaning of the term "constituent power" in Article
368. They are more germane to a statement of a correct theory of
sovereignty which underlies what has been called the "basic structure" of
our Constitution.
579. There are scattered dicta in the judgments of the Court speaking of the
"sovereignty of the people" which, in my opinion, can only be related to the
political sovereignty of the people recognised by the preamble to our
Constitution where the people are described as the Constitution-makers who
gave the Constitution unto themselves. This, however, does not, in my
opinion, mean that the people retained unto themselves any residue of legal
sovereignty. They did not prescribe, apart from dividing the exercise of
sovereign power roughly between the three organs of the Republic, each
with its own modus operandi, any other or direct method, such as Initiative
or Referendum, for exercising their politically sovereign power. The view I
have tried to put forward in the foregoing pages is that the people entrusted
to the three organs of the Sovereign Democratic Republic they constituted
the exercise of three aspects of sovereign power on behalf of the people.
This seems to me to be the only way of reconciling the idea of a sovereign
people, in the political sense, and the sovereignty of the Republic,
represented by a legally supreme Constitution, so that the "sovereign"
powers of each of the three organs of the Republic had to be exercised in
conformity with the mandates, both positive and negative, express and
implied, of the Constitution. I would prefer to describe this concept as one of
the "supremacy of the Constitution" in stead of "sovereignty" of the
Constitution because of the theoretical, speculative, and "emotive" clouds
which have gathered around the term "sovereignty".
580. I have tried to point out that the term sovereignty in its origin is
associated with the actual human ruler or authority wielding theoretically
absolute or final powers. Political philosophers are particularly concerned
with the problem of determining the location and manner of exercise of such
powers if any. Jurists, however, have also occupied themselves with these
problems partly because Constitutional law, as Dicey once pointed out, has
some overlapping territory with the political theory which underlies it. Some
Constitutional lawyers, such as Ivor Jennings, have said that it is flirtation
with political theory which has brought into the juristic fold a term such as
'sovereignty'. On the other hand, political theorists, such as Mc Iver, have
blamed, far less justly, jurists like Austin for infecting political theory with
legalitic authoritarian notions of sovereignty. Political theorists, in their
attempts to understand and rationalize, and sometimes to justify or
condemn a system are more concerned with the operations of all those
socio-economic-compolitical forces which govern society. Law is, for them,
one of these forces and reflects them. Lawyers have been compelled to
"Flirt' (if I may employ the term used by Sir Ivor Jennings with sovereignty)
only because they have to look for some final authority which determines
the validity of the claims they have to deal with. Political theorty, faced with
the complexities of modern life, finds location of sovereignty as a power
concept too elusive and difficult a task to be satisfactorily carried out. Some
of them would like to banish the term to the region of purely moral
philosophy where it could be reserved for such freedom of thought and will
and action as even the most powerful totalitarian State, employing all the
techniques based on Prof. Pavlov's theories for purposes of propaganda,
cannot take away from the individual. Others find it of use only in
International Law to denote that independence of the national State and the
freedom which it claims and is entitled to from outside interference. Jurists
as well as practical lawyers have to be content with finding an ultimate
measuring rod in a fundamental law which could test the validity of exercise
of every kind of Governmental power. Their quest for certainty is even more
pressing and urgent than that of the political theorist. For their purposes,
the supremacy of the Constitution, of which a very vital and necessary part
is the constituent power, is sufficient. Of course, they have to determine the
content of "constituent power" itself in the light of all relevant considerations
which, as I have indicated above, may take us outside the ordinary range of
Law. Nevertheless, our deviation from the orthodox canons of construction
and interpretation, when faced with such a problem must not be so wide as
to rob our method of construction itself of legal propriety or give rise to the
suspicion that we have ourselves clearly trespassed into the territory of law
making. The lines of demarcation, though difficult to draw sometimes, are,
nevertheless, there.
581. I do not think that it is at all helpful to refer to certain authorities of
this Court which were, rather surprisingly, relied upon by learned Counsel
supporting the 39th amendment to discover the nature of the "constituent
power" contained in Article 368. I will content myself by citing a passage
from the last of these cases relied upon which mentions the earlier cases of
this Court also on the effect of a "Firman", in Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji
Maharaj v. The State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0028/1963 : [1964]1SCR561
Gajendragadkar J., speaking for this Court said at p. 591 of SCR : at p. 1650
of AIR:
In appreciating the effect of this Firman, it is first necessary to
decide whether the Firman is a law or not. It is matter of common
knowledge that at the relevant time the Maharana of Udaipur was
an absolute monarch in whom vested all the legislative, judicial and
executive powers of the State. In the case of an absolute Ruler like
the Maharana of Udaipur, it is difficult to make any distinction
between an executive order issued by him or a legislative comand
issued by him. Any order, issued by such Ruler has the force of law
and did govern the rights of the parties affected thereby. This
position is covered by decisions of this Court and it has not been
disputed before us, Vide Madhaorao Phalke v. the State of Madhya Bharat MANU/SC/0003/1960 : [1961]1SCR957 Ammer-un-Nisa Begum v. Mahboob Begum MANU/SC/0093/1955 : AIR1955SC352 ,
and Director of Endowments, Government of Hyderabad v. Akram Ali MANU/SC/0105/1955 : AIR1956SC60 . 582. It is evident, from the quotation, relied upon by the Solicitor-General,
that this Court was not deciding whether the Firman was even a "law" in the
sense of a general nor which had to be applied to the decision of cases. It
was held that whatever be its juristic character it had the "force of law"
inasmuch as the Ruler of Udaipur was an absolute ruler, who combined in
his person the legislative, the judicial, and executive authority of the State.
That was the Constitution of Udaipur. The doctrine of separation of powers,
in such a context, was really irrelevant. Article 368 of our Constitution,
however, is not a power acquired by our Republic by State Succession from
the powers of Indian ruling princes. The legislative history behind it is
entirely different.
583. As a matter of legislative history, we will find the source of the
"constituent power" in Sections 6 and 8 of the Indian Independence Act
passed by the British Parliament. Section 6 of that Act constituted a
"Legislature" for each of two Dominions set up with plenary powers of
legislation. The legislative powers of the Legislature of each Dominion were
so enlarged by Section 8 that it could frame the Constitution of the
Dominion concerned. This was a transfer of only a legislative power. Section
8 said : "for the purpose of making provision as to the Constitution of the
Dominion, the legislature of the dominion was recognised as the constituent
assembly of the Dominion". These powers were "plenary" in the sense in
which this term is used in Queen v. Burah (1878) 5 Ind App 178 but they
were confined to law making and did not extend to adjudication or decision
of individual cases which is certainly distinguishable from a law-making
power. For purposes other than framing of the Constitution, provisions of the
Government of India Act operated until they were repealed and replaced by
other relevant provisions. Such was the process of a legislative succession
through which institutional transformation or transition to a new but
corresponding set of institutions was brought about. In the eyes of law, this
was an evolutionary process through Constitutional channels and not a
revolutionary break with the past.
584. It is true that, in the exercise of the law making constituent power,
brought in by Section 8 of the Indian Independence Act, the legislatures
could be armed with judicial powers as well if appropriate laws were made
to that effect. But, as no law, either Constitutional or ordinary was passed,
preceding 39th amendment, to repeal the Act of 1951 and then to vest a
judicial power in Parliament, so as to enable it to take over and decide
election disputes itself directly, I do not see how Clause (4) of Article 329A,
if it contained certain provisions on the assumption that such a judicial
power was already there in Parliament, could be valid as a piece of mere law
making. However, counsel supporting the 39th Amendment had submitted
that Article 329A(4) evidenced and constituted an exercise of some
"unbroken" or a combined legislative and judicial power-proposition for
which no precedent of any such consolidated action of a constituent body
was cited from any part of the world. The Firmans of former Indian ruling
princes were hardly suitable or applicable precedents.
585. An attempt was made to convince us that what may not have been
otherwise possible for Parliament to do became possible by invoking the
presumed exercise of some judicial power imported by Article 105(3) of the
Constitution which says:
105(3)...the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of
Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House,
shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by
law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the House of Commons,
of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and
committees, at the commencement of this Constitution,
586. I am unable to see how what was not conferred upon Parliament itself,
in its constituent capacity, could be impliedly assumed to be there by virtue
of certain "powers, privileges and immunities" which belong separately to
each House of Parlia ment. Such a claim could not be based upon what is to
be found directly in Article 368. It is sought to be derived from Article 105.
This reasoning would, obviously, conflict With the provisions of Article
329(b) of the Constitution which indicates that an election dispute can only
be resolved by an election petition before a forum provided by art ordinary
enactment Article 329(b) says:
329(b) No election to either House of Parliament or to the House or
either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in
such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by
the appropriate Legislature.
587. In exercise of its powers under Article 329(b) our Parliament had
enacted the Act of 1951. The procedure provided by the Act had the binding
force of a Constitutionally prescribed procedure. It could not be
circumvented unless, with reference to cases covered by Article 329A(4), it
had been first repealed. Only after such a repeal could any other forum or
procedure be legally adopted. It, could not be assumed, by reason of Article
105(3), that the prescribed forum had shifted to Parliament itself, and that
Parliament, in exercise of its constituent function, had both legislated and
adjudicated. This is what we were asked to accept.
588. The well recognised rule of construction of statutes, which must apply
to the intepretation of the Constitution as well, is : "Expressio Unius Est
Exclusio Alterius". From this is derived the subsidiary rule that an expressly
laid down mode of doing something necessarily prohibits the doing of that
thing in any other manner. The broad general principle is thus summarised
in CRAWFORD'S "Statutory Constructions" (1940) at p. 334:
Express Mention and Implied Exclusion (Expressio Unius Est
Exclusio Alterius)-As a general rule in the interpretation of statutes,
the mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another thing. I
therefore logically follows that if a statute enumerates the things
upon which it is to operate, everything else must necessarily, and
by implication, be excluded from its operation and effect. For
instance, if the statute in question enumerats the matters over
which a court has jurisdiction, no other matters may be included.
Similarly, where a statute forbids the performance of certain things,
only those things expressly mentioned are forbidden. So also, if the
statute directs that certain acts shall be done in a specified manner,
or by certain person, their performance in any other manner than
that specified, or by any other person than one of those named, is
impliedly prohibited.
589. It is interesting to note that in the Australian Constitution, where there
is Article 49, using language very similar to that of Article 105(3) of our
Constitution, there is also a separate but differently cast Article 47 of the
Australian Constitution corresponding to Article 329(b) of our Constitution.
This article runs as follows:
Article 47. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, any question
respecting the qualification of a senator or of a member of the
House of Representatives, or respecting a vacancy in either House
of the Parliament, and any question of a disputed election to either
House, shall be determined by the House in which the question
arises.
590. What is separately, expressly, and especially provided for by Article
329(b) must necessarily fall outside the purview of Article 105(3) on the
principle stated above. Moreover, Article 105(3) contained a temporary
provision until other provision was made by Parliament in that behalf.
Appropriate provisions were enacted by the Act of 1951 in compliance with
Article 329(b) because that was the proper Article for it. It would be idle to
contend that these provisions suddenly lapsed or ceased to exist as soon as
Parliament took up consideration of the issue and the grounds of the
decision on them by the High Court to which reference is made in Article
329A(4). Again, a purported exercise of power, in enacting Article 329A(4),
could only be a law making power and not any other power which could
conceivably fall under Article 105, Sub-article (3). Nevertheless, it was
suggested, by copious references to the origin of the power of the House of
Common s to decide disputes relating to elections, that such a power exists
in each House of our Parliament as its inherent power. Such an argument
completely overlooks that, quite apart from the great difference made by
providing both the forum and the procedure for deciding election disputes
indicated by Article 329(b) of our Constitution, Article 105(3) itself could
only refer to such powers as were still exercisable by the House of Commons
at the time when our Constitution was passed. Long before that, the House
of Common s in England had ceased to decide election disputes itself. It had
transferred this power to Courts by statute and has not resumed it. In fact,
the law enacted in the Representation of the People Act, 1949, by the British
Parliament confirmed this transfer or delegation of power. Section 107 of
that Act makes it clear, like Article 329(b) of our Constitution, that the
statutory remedies are the only ones open for election disputes.
591. The reasons why the House of Commons itself saw the need for
entrusting to a rota of High Court Judges, the jurisdiction at one time
exercised by it directly to determine its election disputes, is found thus
stated by BLACKSTONE, quoting Erskine May's "Parliamentary Practice and
Procedure" (at pp. 153-155):
For a considerable time after the house had obtained this
jurisdiction, controverted elections were tried by committees
specially nominated, composed of privy councillors and burgesses,
well qualified for the duties entrusted to them. But after 1672, it
became an open committee, in which all who came had voices; and
at length a hearing at the bar of the House was considered
preferable to an inquiry by a committee. Here again, to use the
words of Sir Erskine May, "the partiality and injustice of the judges
was soon notorious. Parties tried their strength-the friends of rival
candidates canvassed and manoeuvred, and seats corruptly gained,
were as corruptly protected or, voted away. Such were the results of
the usurpation of judicial functions by a popular body.
In order to remedy, if possible, these unquestionable evils, the statute 10
Geo. III C. 16, called from its author the Grenville Act, was passed in 1770,
and the trial of election petitions transferred to a select committee of
thirteen members, which it was thought would be 'a court independent of
the House, though composed of its own members'. For a time there was a
marked improvement in the decision of controverted elections. 'But too soon
it became evident that corruption and party spirit had not been overcome.
Crowds now attended the ballot, as they had previously come to the vote;-
not to secure justice, but, to aid their own political friends'. The party,
whether of the petitioner or sitting member, which attended in the greatest
number inevitably had the numerical majority of names drawn for the
committee, and from this list, the petitioner and sitting member struck out
alternately one name until the committee was reduced to thirteen; the
majority of the House was necessarily a majority of the committee. The
result it was not difficult to foresee. Though the members 'were sworn to do
justice between the rival candidates, yet the circumstances under which
they were notoriously chosen, their own party-bias, and a lax conventional
morality-favoured by the obscurity and inconsistencies of the election law,
and by the conflicting decisions of incapable tribunals, led to this equivocal
result; that the right was generally discovered to be on the side of the
candidate who professed the same political opinions as the majority of the
committee'.
'By these means the majority of the house continued, with less directness
and certain-ty, and perhaps with less open scandal, to nominate their own
members, as they had done before the Grenville Act. And for half a century
this system with slight variations of procedure, was suffered to prevail. In
3839, however the ballot was at length superseded by Sir Robert Peel's Act;
committees were reduced to six members, and nominated by an impartial
body-the General Committee of Elections. The same principle of selection
was adhered to in later Acts, with additional securities for impartiality, and
the committee was finally reduced to five members. The evil was thus
greatly diminished; but. still the sinister influence of party was not wholly
overcome. In the nomination of election committees, one party or the other
necessarily had a majority of one, and though these tribunals undoubtedly
became far more able and judicial, their Constitution and proceedings often
exposed them to imputation of political bias.'
At length by the statutes 31 and 32 Vict. C. 125, the trial of election
petitions was transferred to certain of the puisne judges at Westminster,
who are selected annually to form a rota for this specific purpose; and who
inquire upon the spot in open court into the allegations of a petitioner, either
claiming a seat, or alleging an undue return or election. The decision of the
judge, who has power to reserve his judgment until he has consulted the
Common  Pleas division of the High Court, in which these proceedings are
instituted, is final to all intents and purposes; the House of Commons being
bound to give the necessary directions for confirming or altering the returns
or for issuing a writ for a new election, or carrying such determination into
execution as circumstances may require". And this abstract of the
proceedings at elections of knights, citizens, and burgesses, concludes our
inquiries into the laws and customs more peculiarly relative to the House of
Common s.
592. I do not think that it is possible to contend, by resorting some concept
of a succession to the powers of the medieval "High Court of Parliament" in
England, that a judicial power also devolved upon our Parliament through
the Constituent Assembly, mentioned in Section 8 of the Indian
Independence Act of 1947. As already indicated by me, the Constituent
Assembly was invested with law making and not judicial powers. Whatever
judicial power may have been possessed once by English King, sitting in
Parliament, constitution the highest Court of the realm in medieval England,
have devolved solely on the House of Lords as the final Court of appeal in
England. "King in Parliament" had ceased to exercise judicial powers in any
other way long before 1950. And, the House of Commons had certainly not
exercised a judicial power as a successor to the one time jurisdiction of the
"King in Parliament", with the possible exception of the power to punish for
its contempts. I use the qualifying word "possible" because the more correct
view of it today may be that this power is also, as it is considered in
America, a mere incident of legislative power, necessary for the due
performance of law making functions and not an "inheritance".
593. In Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice (18th Edn.), after citing the
opinions of Judges, to whom a reference was made by the House of Lords in
Thorpe's case (1451), that "Lex Parliamenti" seemed something as strange
and peculiar as foreign law as for Common Law Courts, it Was explained (at page 187). These views belonged to a time when the distinction between the
judicial and legislative functions of Parliament was undrawn or only
beginning to be drawn, and when the separation of the Lords from
the Common s was much less complete than it was in the
seventeenth century. Views about the High Court of Parliament and
its powers which were becoming antiquated in the time of Coke,
continued to be repeated far into the eighteenth century, although
after the Restoration principles began to be laid down which were
more in accord with the facts of the modern Constitution. But much
confusion remained which was not diminished. by the use of the
phrase 'privilige of Parliament'. This only means a body of rights
common  to both Houses, but it suggests joint action (or
enforcement) by both Houses, as in legislation, whereas from
Ferrers' case in Henry VIII's reign, in 1543 each House enforced its
own privileges separately. There notions arise from this confusion or
thought:
1. That the courts, being inferior to the High Court of
Parliament, cannot call in question the decision of either
House on a matter of privilege.
2. That the lex et consuetudo Parliamenti is a separate law,
and therefore unknown to the courts.
3. That a Resolution of either House declaratory of privilege
is a judicial precedent binding on the Courts.
594. The ' confusions mentioned above misled some people in this country,
due to the provisions of Article 194(3) of our Constitution, on the question
whether a House of a Legislature had not only the power to punish a citizen
for contempt but also to exercise what is really a judicial power to interpret
and determine the ambit of its own jurisdiction. Gajendragadkar, C.J.
speaking for this Court in Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 (supra), rejected
this claim and explained the English law on the subject. The learned Chief
Justice pointed out the incidental character of any claim to a power,
privilege, or immunity which could be covered by Article 194(3), a provision
identically similar to Article 105(3), He pointed out that the only exception
to this rule was the power to punish for its own contempt which, since the
decision of Privy Council in Kielley v. Carson (1842) 4 Moo PC 63 could be
thought of as a power of the House of Commons even acquired as a (sic) of
"inheritance" from the powers once possessed by the High Court of
Parliament in England. But, as all judicial or quasi-judicial power is, under
our Constitution, expressly made exercisable under the supervision of the
judicial organs of the, State, it was held that a decision about the existence
of' the power to punish for contempt, on the facts of a particular case, is
vested in the High Court. Even Sarkar, J., in his dissenting minority opinion,
said (at p. 513) (of SCR) : "1 do not think that the House of Commons was
itself ever a Court. The history of that House does not support such a
contention." The result is similar to that in England where Courts do
determine the orbit of a claim to a power as a Parliamentary preserve, on
the facts of a case, although, once it is established that the claim is to a
power confined to its proper sphere, they will not decide a mere question of
its proper exercise.
595. Whatever view one may take of any other powers of Parliament, by
reason of Article 105(3) of the Constitution, I am unable to see how exercise
of the jurisdiction to determine an election dispute, which was in accordance
with Article 329(b), already vested in the High Court by the Act of 1951 for
all elections to House of the People, could not only be taken away by a
Constitutional amendment, purporting to repeal retrospectively the
provisions of the Act of 1951, a piece of ordinary legislation, in their
application to particular class of cases, but at the same time, making a
declaration of the rights of the parties to a judgment, without first
performing a judicial function also which was not included in the
"constituent" or any other law making power.
596. The question was not clearly raised before us whether a Constitutional
amendment could partially repeal the provisions of an ordinary piece of
legislation, that is to say, the Act of 1951, in so far as its application to a
certain class of cases is concerned. One of the submissions of the learned
Counsel for the election petitioner, however, was that, inasmuch as the
Constitution lays down the norms to which ordinary legislation must
conform, its proper sphere of operation is different from that or ordinary
legislation which takes place under the provisions of Articles 245 to 255 of
the Constitution. The argument seemed to be, that, if ordinary law making
and Constitution making took place in different orbits or on different planes
of law making power what could be done by one method was necessarily
prohibited by the other. Learned Counsel relied upon a number of passages
from the judgment in Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 , and, in particular, on what Ray, J., (as he then was) said (at p. 386) (of SCR) : at p. 1688 of AIR: The constituent power is sui generis. The majority view in Golak Nath case MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762 that Article 13(2) prevails over Article 368 was on the basis that there was no
distinction between constituent and legislative power and an
amendment of the Constitution was law and that such law attracted
the opening words of Article 245 which in its turn attracted the
provisions of Article 13(2). Parliament took notice of the two
conflicting views which had been taken of the unamended Article
368, took notice of the fact that the prepondering judicial opinion,
namely, the decision in Shankari Prasad case, Sajjan Singh case
and the minority views of five learned Judges in Golak Nath case
were in favour of the view that Article 368 contained the power of
amendment and that power was the constituent power belonging to
Parliament. Wanchoo, J. rightly said in Golak Nath case that the
power under Article 368 is a constituent power to change the
fundamental law, that is to say, the Constitution and is distinct from
ordinary legislative power. So long as this distinction is kept in mind
Parliament will have power under Article 368 to amend the
Constitution and what Parliament does under Article 368 is not
ordinary law making which is subject to Article 13(2) or any other
Article of the Constitution, This view of Wanchoo, J. was adopted by
Parliament in the Constitution 24th Amendment Act which made
explicit that under Article 368 Parliament has the constituent power
to amend this Constitution.
597. On the other hand, learned Counsel defending the 39th Amendment re
lied on a number of passages from various judgments, including mine, in Kesavananda Bharti's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , indicating that at least the minority view there was that the power of
amendment contained in Article 368 was only limited by the procedure laid
down in Article 368(2) of the Constitution and nothing else. It is true that
this is what was emphasized by several learn ed Judges, including myself, in
dealing with a case where the real question was whether the constituent
power embraced an amendment of the Constitution in such a way as to take
away fundamental rights. But, neither the question whether "constituent
power" itself contained judicial power within its fold nor the question
whether "constituent power operated on a plane or in a sphere which
excluded altogether what could be done through ordinary legislation were
under the consideration in Kesavananda's case (supra). Some pass ages
were cited from my judgment in that case indicating that the constituent
plane of basic changes excluded the ordinary law making plane of
legislation, the two belonging, so to speak, to different spheres or orbits of
operation. I think I had only cited Prof. Ernest Barker's statements of his
theory some of which could convey that sense. But, I had not committed
myself to a view on the question whether there was a limit on the subject
matter of constituent law making.
598. It could be and has been argued, not without force, that there are no
legal limitations upon the subject matter which may be considered fit for
inclusion or incorporation in a Constitution. This is left to the good sense of
the Constitution makers. Constitutions differgreately in this respect (See :
Wheare's "Modern Constitution" pp, 49 to 51). What may be the ideal, from
this point of view, is not always the actual. Reference was also made in
support of this submission to Rottschaefer on "Constitutional Law" 1939 Edn
10. It is not necessary to pursue this question any further here,
599. I had said, in Kesavananda's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 :
AIR1973SC1461 after dealing with amending power in Article 368, on the
assumption that it was an exercise of a "sovereign power" at p. 870 of SCR :
at p. 1975 of AIR
No doubt the judicial organ has to decide the question of the limits
of a sovereign authority as well as that of other authorities in cases
of dispute. But when these authorities act within these limits, it
cannot interfere". In other words, I look upon a "sovereign power"
itself, under the Constitution, as limited by the supremacy of the
Constitution.
600. If the Constitutional provisions compel us to hold, as I think they do,
that no form of judicial or quasi-judicial power is included in the "constituent
power", contain ed in Article 368 of the Constitution, no further question
need really be considered by us if we were to hold that the insertion of
Clause (4) in Article 329A necessarily involved, as a condition precedent to
the making of the declaration found at the end of it, the performance of a
quasi-judicial or judicial function. But, I do not think that we could go so far
as that. The Act of 1951, enacted under the provisions of Article 329(b) of
the Constitution, provided a procedure which could not be circumvented.
This procedure was certainly applicable until 10-8-1975 when the 39th
Amendment received Presidential assent. Rights of appeal under Section
116A of the Act having been invoked by the Original Respondent as well as
by the election petitioner, and the operation of the High Court's order having
been suspended, the position was, in the eyes of law, that the election
dispute was continued by a proceeding, exclusively prescribed by Article
329(b) for the resolution of the dispute, pending in this Court. I do not
think, that despite the impression created by the terms of the declaration at
the end of Clause (4) of Article 329A and the opening statement of the
counsel for the original respondent, we can assume that Parliament took
over the case into its own hands to decide it and to incorporate the result in
the form of Article 329A(4) so that this may take the place of a possible
judgment of this Court. Parliament could not be deemed to be unaware of
the bar created by Article 329(b) and the 1951 Act.
601. At one stage, counsel supporting the 39th amendment said that the
norms of the Act of 1951, together with the amendment of the Act in 1974
and the very recent ones of 1975, must have been present in the minds of
members of Parliament and applied to the facts of the case. Such a
contention, apart from overlooking the effect of the bar of Article 329(b),
which operated against the case being taken up in Parliament directly until
at least 10-8-1975, just as Section 107 of the British Representation of
People Act, 1949, operates against the adoption of such a course in England,
overlooked the legal effect of the deeming provision which, if valid, would
repeal such a submission of counsel supporting the 39th amendment. The
deeming provision appeared to be quite sweeping. It said:
No law made by Parliament before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, in so far as it
relates to election petitions and matters connected therewith, shall
apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to
the election of any such person as is referred to in Clause (1) to
either House of Parliament.
602. The effect of such a provision is thus stated, in the oft quoted passage
from East End Dwellings Co. Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council (1952) AC
109:
If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you
must surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real
the consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of
affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or
accompanied it . The statute says that you must imagine a certain
state of affairs, it does not say that having done so, you must cause
or permit your imagination to boggle when it comes to the
inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs.
603. When the effect of Article 329(b) and of the deeming provision was
pointed out to learned Counsel supporting the 4th Clause of Article 329A,
they took up the position that Parliament must have applied its own norms.
We, however, do not know at all and cannot guess what matters were
considered or the norms applied by Parliament. No speeches made in
Parliament on the proposed 39th amendment were cited before us by either
side. We only know that the Objects and Reasons of the 39th Amendment
contain the following statements to show us why Article 329A(4) was
believed to be necessary:
Article 71 of the Constitution provides that disputes arising out of
the election of the President or Vice-President shall be decided by
the Supreme Court. The same article provides that matters relating
to their election shall be regulated by a parliamentary law. So far as
the Prime Minister and the Speaker are concerned, matters relating
to their election are regulated by the provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. Under this Act the High
Court has jurisdiction to try an election petition presented against
either of them.
2. The President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker are holders of high offices. The President is not answer-
able to a Court of law for anything done, while in office, in the
exercise of his powers. A fortiori matters relating to his election
should not be brought before a court of law but should be entrusted
to a forum other than a court. The same reasoning applies equally
to the incumbents of the office of Vice-President, Prime Minister and
Speaker. It is accordingly proposed to provide that dispute relating
to the election of the President and Vice-President shall be
determined by a forum as may be determined by a Parliamentary
law. Similar provision is proposed to be made in the case of the
election to either House of Parliament or, as the case may be, to the
House of the People of a person holding the office of Prime Minister
or the Speaker. It is further proposed to render pending
proceedings in respect of such election under the existing law null
and void. The Bill also provides that the Parliamentary law creating
a new forum for trial of election matters relating to the incumbents
of the high offices above-mentioned shall not be called in question
in any court.
604. I think that this statement of Objects and Reasons and other reasons
mentioned above by me lend support to the submission, to which Mr.
Kaushal confined himself whilst other counsel supporting the validity of
Article 329A(4) offered it only as an alternative submission. This was that
the whole procedure adopted and needed being a law making procedure and
nothing more there was no need to look for norms of for law applied as no
judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding was involved. This approach certainly
avoids the extraordinary anomalies and results involved in the proposition
that "constituent power" embraces some indefinable or "unbroken" power to
override laws and to withdraw and decide all disputes, particularly in
election matters, in Parliament itself. As already indicated, there is no
provision anywhere for the exercise of overriding judicial or quasi-judicial
powers by Parliament, It is difficult to conceive a case being considered by
Parliament and the ratifying legislatures as a case on trial. Parliament could
not, therefore, be assumed to have withdrawn and then to have decided a
particular case in a particular way by applying its own norms. It is presumed
to know the law. Ostensibly, Article 329A(4) is part of an amendment of the
Constitution for the purposes found in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons. Only the declaration given at the end of it suggests that, in the
course of it, the effect upon the case before us was considered and dealt
with.
605. If Article 329A(4) constituted only a piece of purported law making, the
next question, which deserves very serious consideration by us, is whether
such purported law making is not fully covered by the undoubted law
making power of Parliament to make law prospectively as well as
retrospectively, inter alia, to get rid of the legal effect or result of a
judgment considered erroneous by it or to retrospectively validate an
election it considers valid whatever may be its reasons for reaching this
conclusion. I will answer this question after considering the relevant case
law cited on the subject,
606. A number of cases have been cited before us : some on retrospective
validation of taxing provisions, by removing defects others on removal of
the basis of or grounds of decisions given by Courts making their judgments
ineffective, others affecting the jurisdiction of Courts in cases pending,
either in the original Courts or in Courts of Appeal so as to render
proceedings infructuous, and still others curing legally defective
appointments or elections. It is not necessary to discuss these cases
separately and individually as the principles laid down there are well
recognised. I will be content with mentioning the cases cited. They were
M.P.V. Sundararamier and Co. v. the State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr.
MANU/SC/0151/1958 : [1958]1SCR1422 ; Shree Vinod Kumar v. State of
Himachal Pradesh MANU/SC/0016/1958 : AIR1959SC223 : Jadab Singh v.
the Himachal Pradesh Administration MANU/SC/0055/1960 : [1960]3SCR755 ; Udai Ram Sharma v, Union of India MANU/SC/0154/1968 : [1968]3SCR41 , Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0011/1970 : [1970]3SCR530 ; Jagannath v. Authorised Officer. Land Reforms MANU/SC/0570/1971 : [1972]1SCR1055 ; Khyerban Tea Co. Ltd. v. The State of Assam MANU/SC/0048/1963 : [1964]5SCR975 , Tirath
Ram Rajindra Nath, Lucknow v. State of U.P. AIR 1973 SC 450, Krishna
Chandra Gangopadhyaya v. The Union of India MANU/SC/0143/1975 :
AIR1975SC1389 , Pandia Nadar v The State of Tamil Nadu
MANU/SC/0439/1974 : [1975]1SCR333 ; State of Orissa v. B.K. Bose
MANU/SC/0220/1961 : AIR1962SC945 .
607. Cases were also cited where rights having been altered during the
pendency of proceedings, Courts had to give effect to the rights as altered,
and judgments already given on the strength of the previous law had ceased
to have a binding force as res judicata between parties or had to be set
aside where appeals against them were pending. These were : State of U.P. v. Raja Anand Brahma Shah MANU/SC/0273/1966 : [1967]1SCR362 ; Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Broach Borough Municipality MANU/SC/0057/1969
: [1971]79ITR136(SC) : Janapada Sabha. Chhindwara v. The Central
Provinces Syndicate Ltd. MANU/SC/0398/1970 : [1970]3SCR745 : Municipal
Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad etc. v. New Shorock Spg. & Wvg. Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0451/1970 : [1971]1SCR288 : State of Tamil Nadu v. M.R. Gounder, MANU/SC/0402/1970 : AIR1971SC231 ; Amarjit Kaur v. Pritam Singh MANU/SC/0006/1974 : [1975]1SCR605 : Qudrat Ullah v. Municipal Board, Bareilly MANU/SC/0418/1973 : [1974]2SCR530 .
608. Cases were also cited of the exercise of Constitutional power of
amendment, by placing Acts in the 9th Schedule, under the provisions of
Article 31-B of the Constitution, such as Jagannath v. Authorised Officer. Land Reforms MANU/SC/0570/1971 : [1972]1SCR1055 so that Acts so included in the 9th Schedule were immune from attack on the ground of
alleged violation of any fundamental rights. It is not necessary to cite them
as this is now a well recognised Constitutional device whose validity has
been upheld by this Court in Kesavananda Bharti's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 .
609. Our attention was especially invited to passages from Udai Ram
Sharma v. Union of India [1960]3SCR755 , where it was said (at page 4):
In our opinion no useful purpose will be served by referring to the
clear demarcation between the judicial powers and legislative
Powers in America and attempt to engraft the said principle in the
working of our Constitution. This development of the law, as
pointed out in A.K. Gopalan v. State, was due to historical reasons.
610. After that. the following pass age from the judgment of Das, J., in A.K.
Gopalan's case MANU/SC/0012/1950 : 1950CriLJ1383 was Quoted (at page
55):
The Supreme Court of the United States, under the leadership of
Chief Justice Marshall, assumed the power to declare any law
unconstitutional on the ground of its not being in "due process of
law,"
...It is thus that the Supreme Court established its own supremacy
over the executive and the Congress. In India the position of the
Judiciary is some where in between the Courts in England and the
United States. While in the main leaving our Parliament and the
State Legislatures supreme in their respective legislative fields, our
Constitution has, by some of the articles, put upon the Legis lature
certain specified limitations
Our Constitution, unlike the English Constitution, recognises the
Court's supremacy over the legislative authority, but such
supremacy is a very limited one, for it is confined to the field where
the legislative power is circumscribed by limitations put upon it by
the Constitution itself. Within this restricted field the Court may, on
a scrutiny of the law made by the Legislature, declare it void if it is
found to have transgressed the Constitutional limitations.
611. In Udai Ram Sharma's case [1960]3SCR755 the following passage
from Willoughby's Constitution of the United States. Second Edition, Vol. 3,
was also cited:
If the legislature would prescribe a different rule for the future from
that which the Courts enforce, it must be done by statute, and
cannot be done by a mandate to the Courts which leaves the law
unchanged, but seeks to compel the Courts to construe and apply it
not according to the judicial, but according to the legislative
judgment If the legislature cannot thus indirectly control the action
of the Courts. by requiring of them a construction of the law
according to its own views, it is very plain it cannot do so directly,
by setting aside their judgments, compelling them to grant new
trials, ordering the discharge of offenders, or directing what
particular steps shall be taken in the progress of a judicial inquiry.
612. Willoughby's statement of law in the United States of America showing
that retroactive legislation which does not impair vested or substantial rights
or Constitutional prohibitions, is permissible and his conclusion, relying on
Cooley's "Constitutional Limitations", was also quoted:
The legislature does, or may, prescribe the rules under which the
judicial power is exercised by the Courts; and in doing so it may
dispense with any of those formalities which are not essential to the
jurisdiction of the Court; and whatever it may dispense with by
statute anterior to the proceedings, we believe it may also dispense
with by statute after the proceedings have been taken. if the Court
has failed to observe any of those formalities. But it would not be
competent for the legislature to authorize a Court to proceed and
adjudicate upon the rights of parties, without giving them an
opportunity to be heard before it and, for the same reason it would
be incompetent for it, by retrospective legislation, to make valid any
proceedings which had been had in the Courts, but which were void
for want of jurisdiction over the parties.
613. In Udai Ram Sharma's case [1960]3SCR755 (supra) an argument,
based on some observations in B.C. Ghose v. King Emperor
MANU/FE/0020/1944 was that the provisions of an amending Act amounted
to passing a decree. But, this Court repelled this argument reviving on
principles laid down in Q.v. Burah (1878) 5 Ind App 178 (supra):
If what has been done is legislation, within the general scope of the
affirmative words which give the power. and if it violates no express
condition or restriction by which that power is limited (in which
category would, of course, be included any Act of the Imperial
Parliament at variance with it), it is not for any Court of Justice to
inquire further, or to enlarge constructively those conditions and
restrictions.
614. A case strongly relied upon by learned Counsel supporting the validity
of Article 329-A(4) was : Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana
MANU/SC/0275/1969 : [1970]2SCR835 . In this case, decided by five
Judges of this Court, there was unanimity on the conclusion that the State
Legislature had power to retrospectively remove the disqualification of a
candidate. The following Quotation from the judgment (at page 851 of SCR)
shows the reasoning adopted:
Mr. Chagla. learned Counsel for the respondent, contends that the
Rajasthan State Legislature was not competent to 'declare
retrospectively' under Article 191(1)(a) of the Constitution. It
seems to us that there is no force in this contention-It has been
held in numerous cases by this Court that the State Legislatures
and Parliament can legislate retrospectively subject to the
provisions of the Constitution. Apart from the question of
fundamental rights, no express restriction has been placed on the
power of the Legislature of the State, and we are unable to imply, in
the context, any restriction, Practice of the British Parliament does
not oblige us to place any implied restriction. We notice that the
British Parliament in one case validated the election : (Erskine
May's Treatise on the Law, Privileges Proceedings & Usage of
Parliament-Seventeenth (1964) Edition)
"After the general election of 1945 it was found that the persons
elected for the Coatbridge Division of Lanark and the Springbourn
Division of Glassgow were disqualified at the time of their election
because they were members of tribunals appointed by the Minister
under the Rent of Furnished Houses Control (Scotland) Act, 1943.
which entitled them to a small fee in respect of attendance at a
Tribunal. A Select Committee reported that the disqualification was
incurred inadvertently, and in accordance with their
recommendation the Coatbridge and Spring-burn Elections
(Validation) Bill was introduced to validate the irregular elections (H. C Deb (1945-46) 414, c. 564-6). See also H. C 3 (1945-46); ibid, 71 (1945-46) and ibid. 92 (1945-46).
We have also noticed two earlier instances of retrospective legislation, e.g.
The House of Common s (Disqualification) Act, 1813 (Halsbury Statutes of
England P. 467) and : Section 2 of the Re-election of Ministers Act, 1919 (ibid. p. 515). Great stress was laid on the word 'declared' in Article 19(1)(a), but we are
unable to imply any limitation on the powers of the Legislature from this
word. Declaration can be made effective as from an earlier date.
The apprehension that it may not be a healthy practice and this power might
be abused in a particular case are again no grounds for limiting the powers
of the. State Legislature.
615. Another case on which a great deal of reliance was placed by Mr. A.K.
Sen. was the case of the validation of the elections of John Clarke George,
Esquire, and Sir Roland Jennings. Knight, 1955 Law Reports Statutes 4 Eliz
2 by the British Parliament. Here, the two gentle men named above were
"discharged. freed and indemnified from all penal consequences whatsoever
incurred by them respectively by sitting or voting as Members of the
Common s House of Parliament while holding their said offices." It was also
declared that they "shall be deemed not to have been incapable of being
elected members of the Commons House of Parliament, or to have been or
to be incapable of sitting or voting as members thereof, by reason only of
having at any time before the passing of this Act held office:
(a) in the case of the said John Clarke George, as Director
appointed by the Minister of Works of Scottish Slate Industries
Limited,
(b) in the case of the said Sir Roland Jennings, as Approved Auditor
appointed under the Industrial and Provident Societies Act. 1893,
and the Friendly Societies Act, 1896.
616. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner replied that it is noticeable
that no English case could be cited where any attempt was made by the
British Parliament to circumvent Section 107 of the Representation of the
People Act. 1949, which lays down:
Section 107. Method of questioning Parliamentary election.
(1) No parliamentary election and no return of Parliament
shall be questioned except by a petition complaining of an
undue election or undue return (hereinafter referred to as
parliamentary election petition) presented in accordance
with this Part of this Act.
(2) A petition complaining of no return shall be deemed to
be a parliamentary election petition and the High Court
may make such order thereon as they think expedient for
compelling a return to be made or may allow the petition to
be heard by an election court as provided with respect to
ordinary election petitions.
617. He also submitted that, in none of the cases of validation, was any
election dispute shown to be pending. No judgment was actually set aside in
contravention of the binding Constitutionally prescribed procedure to decide
such disputes. He submitted that, in the case of an election to a
Parliamentary seat in this country, this could be done by Parliament itself
only after first repealing the application of the 1951 Act and amending
Article 329(b) in such a way as to vest the power in itself to decide the
dispute.
618. Learned Counsel, for the election petitioner relied upon the following
statement in the American Jurisprudence, 2nd Edn. Vol. 46, at page 318:
The general rule is that the legislature may not destroy, annual, set
aside, vacate, reserve, modify, or impair the final judgment of a
Court of competent jurisdiction, so as to take away private rights
which have be-come vested by the judgment. A statute attempting
to do so has been held unconstitutional as an attempt on the part of
the legislature to exercise judicial power, and as a violation of the
Constitutional guaranty of due process of law. The legislature is not
only prohibited from reopening cases previously decided by the
Courts, but is also forbidden to affect the inherent attributes of a
judgment. That the statute is under the guise of an Act affecting
remedies does not alter the rule.
619. On the other hand, learned Counsel supporting the validity of Article
329-A(4) relied on the following passage:
It is worthy of notice, however, that there are cases in which
judgments requiring acts to be done in the future may validly be
affected by subsequent legislation making illegal that which the
judgment found to be legal, or making legal that which the
judgment found to be illegal
They also pointed out:
With respect to legislative interference with a judgment, a
distinction has been made between public and private rights under
which distinction a statute may be valid" even though it renders
ineffective a, judgment concerning a public right. Even after a
public right has been established by the judgment of the Court, it
may be annulled by subsequent legislation.
620. It is contended that the election of a candidate is the result of the
exercise of their rights of voting by the electorate. An election results from
public action and produces a "public right" inasmuch as the electorate and
the public become interested parties acquiring the right to be represented
by the elected candidate. The right to challenge that election is a statutory
right. What the statute gives can be taken away by statute. The grounds for
challenging the election could also be altered. No one, it was urged, could
be heard to say that he had any vested or inherent right to challenge an
election. It was contended that once the applicability of all law previous to
the 39th amendment to the class dealt with by Article 329-A(4) was
removed retrospectively, the resulting legislative declaration followed
automatically even if it had not been inserted. Its inclusion was a
superfluity. Article 329-A(4) was said to be merely incidental and
consequential to what was done by earlier Clauses (1) to (3). It is difficult to
see how Article 329-A(4) which relates to what was past could be incidental
or consequential to what was intended to be done in future. Moreover, more
serious difficulties, dealt with below, are found here than those which could
arise in ordinary cases of retroactive validation.
621. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner relied on Don John Francis
Douglas Liyanage v. The Queen (1967) 1 AC 259 where the Privy Council,
considered the validity of the Criminal Law Special Amendment Act of 1962,
passed by the Parliament of Ceylon, which had purported to legalise ex post
facto the detention of persons for having committed offences against the
State, by widening the class of offences for which trial, without jury, by
nominated judges could be ordered. The scope of the offence of waging war
against the Queen was widened and new powers to deal with offenders were
given and additional penalties were prescribed. It was held that, although,
no fundamental principles of justice could be said to have been violated by
the Act, yet, the Act of 1962 and an amending Act of 1965, were invalid on
the ground summarised in the head-note as follows (at p. 260):
That the Acts, directed as they were to the trial of particular
prisoners charged with particular offences on a particular occasion,
involved a usurpation and infringement by the legislature of judicial
powers inconsistent with the written Constitution of Ceylon, which,
while not in terms vesting judicial functions in the judiciary,
manifested an intention to secure in the judiciary a freedom from
political, legislative and executive control, and, in effect, left
untouched the judicial system established by the Charter of Justice,
1833. The silence of the Constitution as to the vesting of judicial
power was consistent with its remaining where it was an
inconsistent with any intention that it should pass to or be shared
by the executive or the legislature. The Acts were accordingly ultra
vires and void, and the convictions could not stand.
622. If the constituent bodies, taken separately or together, could be legally
sovereign, in the same way as the British Parliament is, the Constitutional
validity of no amendment could be called in question before us. But, as it is
well established that it is the Constitution and not the constituent power
which is supreme here, in the sense that the Constitutionality of the
Constitution cannot be called in question before us, but the exercise of the
constituent power can be we have to judge the validity of exercise of
constituent power by testing it on the anvil of Constitutional provisions.
Accor ding to the majority view in Kesavananda's case (supra), we can find
the test primarily in the Preamble to our Constitution.
623. A point emphasized by J.C, Gray (See : "Nature & Sources of Law" p.
96) is that unless and until Courts have declared and recognised a law as
enforceable it is not law at all. Kelsen (See : "General Theory of Law &
State" p. 150) finds Gray's views to be extreme. Courts, however, have to
test the legality of laws, whether purporting to be ordinary or Constitutional,
by the norms laid down in the Constitution. This follows from the Supremacy
of the Constitution. I mention this here in answer to one of the questions set
out much earlier : Does the "basic structure" of the Constitution test only
the validity of a Constitutional amendment or also ordinary laws? I think it
does both because ordinary law making itself cannot go beyond the range of
constituent power. At this stage, ' we are only concerned with a purported
Constitutional amendment. According to the majority view in Kesavananda
Bharati's case MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 the preamble
furnishes the yard-stick to be applied even to Constitutional amendments.
624. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner has strongly relied upon the
very first purpose of the Constitution stated in the preamble to be Justice
(with a capital "J") which includes "political justice". His contention is that, if
a majority party is to virtually act as the judge in an election dispute
between itself and minority parties whose cause, according to the learned
Counsel, the election petitioner represents, it would be a plain denial of
"political" justice. I do not know why this question should be termed as one
of "political justice" and not of plain and simple elementary justice except
that the contending parties represent political causes which are, for
purposes of plain and simple justice with which we are really concerned,
irrelevant. We are not asked to judge a political issue directly as to who
should be the Prime Minister of this country. We are only asked to hold that
even a Constitutional amendment, when made by Members of a majority
party to enforce their own views of what is politically and legally right, as
against the views, on these matters, of minority parties, when the
representatives of the minority parties allege a misuse of Constitutional
powers by a deviation from a Constitutionally laid down purpose, such a
legal question of fact and law should be capable of trial and decision by an
independent authority on such exclusively legal grounds as may be open.
That is the simple principle on which learned Counsel for the election
petitioner rests his case, irrespective of the rights and wrongs or the merits
of his client's case and, I have found it impossible to decide it, as I have
decided it against the election petitioner, without going into facts and merits
of the appeals-for the submission that our jurisdiction to try this case on
merits cannot be taken away without injury to the basic postulates of the
rule of law and of justice within a politically democratic Constitutional
structure. I do not think that we can, consistently with the objects of justice,
including what is claimed as "political justice", which are parts of what is
called the "basic structure", deny the right to claim and adjudication from
this Court on exclusively legal issues (not political ones) between the
majority party and the minority groups of parties, however, large and legally
right the majority party may be and however small and legally wrong the
minorities groups or parties may be. Can the legal rights and wrongs, on
such an issue, be resolved, in accordance with the objects of the Preamble,
anywhere other than this Court now? I think that it would be a very
dangerous precedent to lay down that they can be and need be determined
nowhere at all. That is what acceptance of total validity of Article 329-A(4)
may mean if it bars our jurisdiction to hear and decide such a case on
merits.
625. What was sought to be done by the Constitutional amendment may be
politically very justifiable. The question before us, however, is whether it is
also legally justifiable. Here, we are back again in the realm of basic
principles of justice. We are not to decide a political question here at all.
But, we have to decide legal questions even if they have, as many legal
issues have, political consequences and repercussions which we cannot
entirely ignore. Perhaps we have to go back to Marbury v. Madison (1803) 1
Cranch 137 (supra) where Chief Justice Marshal said (at p. 162):
The very essence of civil liberty certainly consists in the right of
every individual to claim the protection of the laws, whenever he
receives an injury. One of the first duties of Government is to afford
that protection. In Great Britain the King himself is sued in the
respectful form of a petition, and he never fails to comply with the
judgment of his court.
In the 3d. vol. of his Commentaries, p. 23 Blackstone states two
cases in which a remedy is afforded by mere operation of law. 'In all
other cases', he says it is a general and indisputable rule, that
where there is a legal right, there is also a legal remedy by suit, or
action at law, whenever that right is invaded.
626. It is true that the right which the election petitioner claims is a purely
statutory right. The right to come to this Court under Section 116-A of the
Act of 1951 is also a creature of statute and can be taken away
retrospectively. But, where this taking away also involves the taking away of
the right to be heard by this Court on a grievance, whether justifiable or
not, that a minority party is being oppressed by the majority, can we deny
the spokesman of the minority even a right to be heard on merits? Such an
issue is Constitutional. Confession of our inability to resolve it judicially
would be, according to learned Counsel for the election petitioner, a denial of
"political justice". This issue is extrinsic so far as the Act of 1951 is
concerned. The election petitioner has complained of the taking away of his
right to be heard with a view to depriving him of "political" justice with an
ulterior object and political motivation. I have dealt with the merits of the
case to show that, from the legal aspect, his grievance, on the merits of his
case, is misconceived. He has no vested right under a palpably erroneous
judgment which was the subject-matter of the two appeals to this Court.
Nevertheless, this could only be demonstrated after we had gone into the
merits of the case and rendered our decision on the issues in accordance
with the law in the 1951 Act. Thus, what is involved is the right of the
election petitioner to be heard on merits and the power of this Court to look
into the merits of the case in order to determine whether the election-
petitioner's grievances could have any real legal foundations. I think that
this is a basic consideration which must compel us,. in the light of the
principles laid down by us in Kesavananda Bharati's case
MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 , to hold that we must look into his
grievances and determine, for ourselves, where his case stood on the law
before it was amended. Our jurisdiction, at any rate, cannot be barred
without creating the impression that what the election petitioner calls
"political justice" is being denied to him.
627. The question which arises now is : Was Clause (4) of 329-A, read with
Clauses (5) and (6), really meant to bar our jurisdiction to consider the
grievances of the petitioner and to decide them, or, can they be so
interpreted as to preserve this Court's jurisdiction?
628. Broadly speaking, the election petitioner has two heads of grievance :
firstly, that the election of the original respondent is vitiated by corrupt
practices which, as I have indicated, after considering the case set up by
him and the evidence tendered and the law applicable, could not possibly
succeed even under the law as it stood before the amendment, and,
secondly, that our very jurisdiction to go into these grievances is sought to
be debarred by Clauses (4), (5) and (6) of Article 329-A(4) with the political
object of stifling opposition, and, therefore, according to the election
petitioner, we must declare Clause (4) and the connected Clauses (5) and
(6) of Article.329-A to be invalid. Although, the 1st set of complaints is
based upon the provisions of the Act of 1951, the second set arises because
of impugned clauses of the 39th Amendment. For the second set of
grievances, the action complained of is that of the State itself acting through
its law making organs. It is because of this interest of the Union of India,
acting in its law making capacity, that we have heard the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General. Although, the second set of grounds may arise as
a result of the 1st set, yet, they are different. Our jurisdiction to consider
these different grounds of complaint does not ordinarily arise at all in the
exercise of our jurisdiction under Section 116-A of the Act of 1951. It is for
this reason, that the election petitioner had filed a separate Writ Petition in
the High Court to challenge an amendment of the Act. But, we decided to
hear arguments on Constitutional issues also without a separate proceeding.
The causes of action arising out of the amendments have become attached
if I may so put it, to the appeals under Section 116-A of the Act because we
could not, under the law, hear the appeals unless these obstacles, if any,
were overcome.
629. Indeed, so far as the original respondent is concerned, the effect of
Clauses (4), (5) and (6) of Article 329-A would be, if we were to hold that
they bar our jurisdiction to go into the merits of the appeals under Section
116-A of the Act, that her grievance against the judgment under appeal also
could not be gone into or dealt with. In other words, the original respondent
Would also be denied an opportunity of asserting her rights under the 1951
Act and of vindicating her stand in the case by showing that there was really
no sustainable ground for the findings given by the learned Judge of the
High Court against her. We would, therefore, be pre-. vented from doing
justice to her case as well if we were to accept the contention that the 39tb
Amendment bars our jurisdiction to hear the appeals under Section 116-A of
the Act on merits. The total effect would be that justice would appear to be
defeated even if, in fact, it is not so as a result of the alleged bar to our
jurisdiction if it- were held to be there. Could it be the intention of
Parliament that justice should appear to be defeated? I think not.
630. It was also contended before us that we should not go at all into the
merits of the case before us as it was a political matter. In other words, the
"political question" doctrine was invoked in aid of the submission that we
should voluntarily abstain from deciding a question of a "political nature". It
is true that the "political question doctrine" has been sometimes invoked, in
the past, by the American Supreme Court to abstain from taking a decision.
In answer to this argument, learned Counsel for the election petitioner cited
before us from comments on the Constitution of the United States of
America (Analysis and Interpretation by the Congressional Research
Service-1973 Edn. 665 that the "political question" doctrine is the result of a
"prudential" attitude Courts adopt when they find that their judgments may
not be enforced. It was described there as "a way of avoiding a principled
decision damaging to the. Court or an expedient decision damaging to the
principle". It was also pointed out there that this doctrine has been
rationalized and considerably narrowed down by the American Supreme
Court in Baker v. Carr (1962) 369 US 186 where it was explained that "non-
justifiability of a political question is primarily function of separation of
powers." It really means that there are matters about which declarations
made or certificates granted by the executive wing of Government would be
treated as conclusive so that Courts will not go behind them. It was also
said there:
Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed by
the Constitution to another branch of government, or whether the
action of that branch exceeds whatever authority has been
committed, is itself a delicate exercise in Constitutional
interpretation, and is a responsibility of this Court as ultimate
interpreter of the Constitution.
631. Learned Counsel for the election petitioner also relied upon H.H.
Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Bahadur v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0050/1970 : [1971]3SCR9 where this Court said : at p. 75 of SCR : at p.563 of AIR: The functions of the State are classified as legislative, judicial and
executive; the executive function is the residue which does not fall
within the other two functions. Constitutional mechanism in a
democratic policy does not contemplate existence of any function
which may qua the citizens be designated as political and orders
made in exercise whereof are not liable to be tested for their
validity before the lawfully constituted courts : Rai Sahib Ram
Jawaya Kapur v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0011/1955 :
[1955]2SCR225 ; Jayantilal Amritlal Shodhan v, F.N. Rana
MANU/SC/0046/1963 : [1964]5SCR294 ; and Halsbury's Laws of
England 3rd Edn. Vol. 7, Article 409, at p. 192.
632. Learned Solicitor General also contended that we were passing through
critical times when a state of Emergency had been declared. He submitted
that the decision of the constituent authorities, in excluding a particular case
from the jurisdiction of this Court, should be treated as an exercise of very
special power under very unusual conditions in which internal and external
dangers, with which the country was surrounded, required that the position
of the Prime Minister should be declared unequivocally unassailable so that
the need for further examination of the question of her election to
Parliament may not be raised anywhere else. This seems to be another form
in which "political question" argument could be and was addressed to us.
Undoubtedly, Clause (4) of Article 329A could be said to have a political
objective, in the context in which it was introduced, and we could perhaps
take judicial notice of this contexts Even if it was possible to go beyond the
statement of objects and reasons and to hold that Clause (4) of Article 329A
is there essentially for demonstrating the strong position of the Government
and of the Prime Minister of this country to all inside and outside the country
so as to inspire the necessary confidence in and give the necessary political
and legal strength to the Government to enable it to go forward boldly to
deal with internal economic and law order problems and international
questions. Yet, I fail to see why this could make it necessary to exclude the
jurisdiction of this Court so as to prevent it from considering a case which
would have been over much sooner if we had not been confronted with
difficulties, at the very outset, in examining the merits of the case. Speaking
for myself, I fail to see what danger to the country could arise or how
national interests could be jeopardised by a consideration and a decision by
this Court of such a good case as I find that the Prime Minister of this
country had on facts and law, Nevertheless I am prepared to concede that
there may be and was some very useful political objective to be served by
demonstrating the strength and ability of, the Government to face the
difficulties with which it had been confronted. If that be so. we can certainly
say that Clause (4) of Article 329A had a political objective and utility which
has been served. And, if that was the real object behind its enactment, it
could not be really to injure the interests of minority political parties or
groups which is what is contended for on behalf of the election petitioner. I
think that the context and the political considerations placed before us could
be relevant in understanding the real meaning of Clause (4) of Article 329A
of the Constitution.
633. It is a well established canon of interpretation that, out of two possible
interpretations of a provision, one which prevents it from becoming
unconstitutional should be preferred if this is possible-ut res magis valeat
quam pereat. It is true that the deeming provision seems to stand in the
way of our examination of the merits of the case even though there is no
direct provision taking away our jurisdiction to consider the merits of the
appeals before us. It has, how ever, been repeatedly laid down that a
deeming provision introducing a legal fiction must be confined to the context
of it and cannot be given a larger effect : (See Radha Kishan v. Durga
Prasad MANU/PR/0035/1940). In Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. the State of
Bihar MANU/SC/0083/1955 : [1955]2SCR603 it was held by this Court that
a legal fiction is created for some definite purposes and should not be
extended beyond its legitimate field determined by its context. The same
view has been expressed by this Court in other cases; C.I.T. Bombay v. James Anderson MANU/SC/0111/1963 : [1964]51ITR345(SC) C. I. T., Madras v. Express Newspapers Ltd., Madras MANU/SC/0126/1964 :
[1964]53ITR250(SC) ; Sri Jagadguru Kari Basava Rajendraswami of
Gavimutt v. Commissioner of Hindu Religious Charitable Endowments, Hyderabad MANU/SC/0290/1964 : [1964]8SCR252 . 634. In Ex-Parte Walton, In Re : Levy (1881) 17 Ch D. 746 James LJ said:
When a statute enacts that something shall be deemed to have
been done, which in fact and in truth was not done, then the court
is entitled and bound to ascertain for what purposes and between
what persons the statutory fiction is to be resorted to?" In other
words, we have to examine the context and the purpose of the legal
fiction and confine its effects to these.
635. If the purpose of the Clause (4) of Article 329A was purely to meet the
political needs of the country and was only partly revealed by the policy
underlying the statement of objects and reasons it seems possible to
contend that it was not intended at all to oust the jurisdiction of the Court,
Hence, Article 329A Clause (5) will not, so understood, bar the jurisdiction
of the Court to hear and decide the appeals when it says that the appeal
shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of Clause (4).
636. In the circumstances of this case, it would seem that conformity with
the declaration embodied in Article 329A Clause (4) is possible, if we confine
the meaning and effect of the deeming provision to what was needed only
for the declaration to be given at the end of Clause (4) by the constituent
bodies, with a political object, and not for the purposes of affecting our
jurisdiction which determines legal effects of what is sought to be done. Of
course, the more natural interpretation would appear to be that the deeming
provision should apply for "all purposes" including those for consideration of
the appeals before us. But if it is not possible to decide those appeals
without giving a different meaning to the deeming provision, on which the
final declaration in Clause (4) rests, and Clause (5) leaves us free to decide
how we could conform with Clause (4). need our jurisdiction to decide
factual and legal issues judicially be said to be affected? If the fiction was
only a. logical step in the process of the declaration to be made by
constituent authorities but not of ours, it would only attach to the
declaration contained at the end of Clause (4). Perhaps it could be argued,
by applying the doctrine of "reading down", that Clause (4) was not
intended to oust the jurisdiction of this Court altogether to try the case. No
such attempts at reading it down have, however, been made by learned
Counsel supporting the validity of Article 329A(4). It is not unlikely that
Article 329A(4) was based on the misapprehension that the High Court's
judgment may be legally correct or that there was a possibility, even for a
case so ill founded in fact and in law as the one put forward on behalf of the
election-petitioner, to succeed in this Court if it had succeeded in the High
Court. We cannot indulge in guess work on these matters. In any case, no
useful purpose will be served now by our declaring anything beyond that
Clause 329A(4) does not so operate as to bar the jurisdiction of this Court to
go into and determine the merits of the appeals before us by applying the
Act of 1951. Even if we were to consider matters of expediency and national
interest, as we should in appropriate cases, it does not appear to me to be
either expedient or in conformity with national interests to leave the matter
in doubt whether the judgment under appeal before us could or could not
legally stand on its own legs under the unamended law,
637. For the reasons given above. I declare that Article 329A(4) does not
stand in the way of the consideration of the appeals before us on merits
under the Act of 1951 or the validity of the amendments of the Act. On a
consideration of the merits of Appeals Nos. 887 and 909 of 1975, I have
come to the conclusion, as indicated above, that Appeal No. 887 must be
allowed and the Cross Appeal No. 909 of 1975 must fail. The result is that
the judgment and orders passed by the learned Judge of the Allahabad High
Court on the election case are set aside, and, in such conformity with Article
329A Clause (4) as is possible for us, I also declare the judgment and the
fundings contained in it to be void and of no effect whatsoever. It is not
necessary for me to add that the order of the learned Judge, holding the
original respondent disqualified from occupying her office, disappears ipso
facto and it neither has nor will be deemed over to have had any legal effect
whatsoever. In the circumstances of the case, I think the parties should bear
their own costs throughout.
Y.V. Chandrachud, J.
638. The Election Petition out of which these appeals arise involved the
question of the validity of the election of Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi to the
Lok Sabha. In the General Parliamentary Elections of 1971, she was
declared as the successful candidate from the Rae Bareli constituency in
Uttar Pradesh. She won the election by a margin of 1,11,810 votes over her
nearest rival, Shri Raj Narain.
639. Shri Raj Narain, who was sponsored by the Samyukta Socialist Party,
filed an election petition under Section 80 read with Section 100 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, to challenge the election of the
successful candidate. Originally, the challenge was founded on numerous
grounds but during the trial of the petition in the High Court of Allahabad,
the challenge was limited to seven grounds.
640. A learned Single Judge of the High Court, M.L. Sinha, J., upheld the
challenge on two grounds, rejecting the other grounds of challenge. That
explains the cross-appeals.
641. The High Court held that the successful candidate was guilty of having
committed two corrupt practices within the meaning of Section 123(7) of
the Representation of the People Act : Firstly, she obtained the assistance of
the Gazetted Officers of the Government of Uttar Pradesh for furthering her
election prospects; and secondly, she obtained the assistance of Shri
Yashpal Kapoor, a gazetted officer in the Government of India holding the
post of Officer on Special Duty in the Prime Minister's Secretariat, for
furthering the same purpose. Acting under Section 8-A of the Act the
learned Judge declared that the successful candidate would stand
disqualified for a period of six years from June 12, 1975 being the date of
the judgment. Aggrieved by this part of the judgment, Smt. Indira Gandhi
has filed appeal No. 887 of 1975.
642. The other five grounds of challenge were : (1) The successful
candidate procured the assistance of the Armed Forces for arranging her
flights by Air Force aeroplanes and helicopters; (2) Her election agent, Shri
Yashpal Kapoor, and others distributed clothes and liquor to induce the
voters to vote for her; (3) She and her election agent made appeals to the
religious symbol of cow and calf; (4) Her election agent and others procured
vehicles for the free conveyance of voters to the polling stations; and (5)
She and her election agent incurred or authorized expenditure in violation of
Section 77(3) of the Act read with Rule 90 of the Conduct of Election Rules,
1961. These grounds having been rejected by the High Court, the defeated
candidate has tiled appeal No. 909 of 1975. The first two grounds were
given up in appeal for the reason that the evidence on record was not likely
to be accepted by this Court in proof thereof.
643. The defeated candidate did not lead evidence in the High Court to show
that any part of the expenditure in excess of the permissible limit of Rs.
35,000 was incurred by the successful candidate or her election agent. His
contention was that the expenditure incurred for her election by the political
party which had sponsored her candidature, the Congress (R), was liable to
be included in the expenses incurred or authorized by her. This contention
was founded on a decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court on
October 3, 1974 in Kanwar Lal Gupta v. Amarnath Chawla
MANU/SC/0277/1974 : [1975]2SCR259 .
644. On October 19, 1974 the President of India promulgated 'The
Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1974 providing that
"Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of any court to the
contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in connection with the
election of a candidate by a political party or by any other association or
body of persons or by any individual (other than the candidate or his
election agent) shall not be deemed to be, and shall not ever be deemed to
have been, expenditure in connection with the election incurred or
authorized by the candidate or by his election agent .." This provision was
added by the Ordinance by way of an Explanation to Section 77(1) of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. It expressly excepted from its
operation decisions of the Supreme Court voiding an election before the
commencement of the Ordinance. Shri Amarnath Chawla fell outside the
Ordinance. It also excepted similar decisions of High Courts provided that
they had become final or unappealable. The Ordinance was replaced by the
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 58 of 1974, which was
brought into force retrospectively from October 19, 1974.
645. The defeated candidate filed Writ Petition 3761 of 1975 in the High
Court to challenge the Constitutional validity of the Ordinance and the Act of
1974. In view of his finding that the total amount of expenditure incurred or
authorized by the successful candidate or her election agent, together with
the amount proved to have been incurred by the political Party or the State
Government in connection with her election, did not exceed the prescribed
limit, the learned Judge thought it unnecessary to inquire into the
Constitutionality of the Ordinance and the Act of 1974. He, therefore,
dismissed the Writ Petition. An appeal was filed to a Division Bench of the
High Court from the aforesaid order but, by consent of parties, this Court
decided to hear the points involved in the Writ Petition and in the appeal
therefrom.
646. During the pendency of these cross-appeals, the Parliament passed the
Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 40 of 1975, which came into force on
August 6, 1975. This Act, if valid, virtually seals the controversy in the
appeal filed in this Court by the successful candidate from the decision of
the Allahabad High Court. It also takes care of a considerable gamut of the
appeal filed in this Court by the defeated candidate. It substitutes a new
Section 8-A in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 empowering the
President to decide whether a person found guilty of corrupt practice shall
be disqualified and if so, for what period. By Section 6, it amends Section 77
of the Act of 1951 making pre-nomination expenses a matter of irrelevant
consideration. It declares that the expenditure incurred by a Government
servant in the discharge of his official duty in connection with any
arrangements or facilities and such arrangements or facilities shall not be
deemed to be expenditure or assistance incurred or rendered for the
furtherance of the election prospects of the candidate concerned. By Section
7, it re-defines a "candidate" to mean a person who has been or claims to
have been duly nominated as a candidate at any election. By Section 8, it
provides that no symbol allotted to a candidate shall be deemed to be a
religious or a national symbol. And it says, to the extent relevant, that the
publication in the Official Gazette of the resignation of a Government
servant shall be conclusive proof of the fact of resignation. If the effective
date of the resignation is stated in the publication, it shall also be conclusive
proof of the fact that the Government servant ceased to be in service with
effect from the particular date. The amendments made by Sections 6, 7 and
8 of the amending Act have retrospective effect and expressly govern
election appeals pending in this Court, among other proceedings.
647. The amendments brought about by Act 58 of 1974 and Act 40 of 1975
have an incisive impact on the cross-appeals but their edge was blunted by
the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act which came into force on
August 10, 1975. The 39th Amendment introduces two new articles in the
Constitution : Articles 71 and 329-A; and it puts in the Ninth Schedule three
Acts : (i) The Representation of the People Act, 43 of 1951; (ii) The
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 58 of 1974; and (iii) The
Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 40 of 1975. The new Article 71 which
replaces its precursor empowers the Parliament to pass laws regulating the
elections of the President and the Vice-President, including the making of a
provision for the decision of disputes relating to their election. Article 329-A
has six clauses out of which the first three deal with the future election to
the Parliament of persons holding the office of Prime Minister or Speaker at
the time of the election or who are appointed to these offices after their
election to the Parliament. These clauses aim at depriving the courts of their
jurisdiction to try election petitions in which the election of the Prime
Minister or the Speaker to the Parliament is challenged. Clause 4 frees the
disputed election of the Prime Minister and the Speaker to the Parliament
from the restraints of all election laws. It declares such election as valid
notwithstanding any judgment and Clause 5 ordains that any appeal or
cross-appeal pending before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of on the
assumption that the judgment under appeal is void, that the findings
contained in the judgment never had any existence in the eye of law and
that the election declared void by the judgment shall continue to be valid in
all respects. Clause 6 provides that Article 329-A shall have precedence over
the rest of the Constitution.
648. At first blush, what remains to be decided judicially in face of the 39th
Amendment? As an exercise of Constituent power, the 39th Amendment
must reign supreme. The political sovereign having reposed its trust in the
legal sovereign, the doings of the Constituent Assembly have an aura of
sanctity that legal ingenuity may be powerless to penetrate. But that is an
uninformed approach to a field strewn with various shades of legal
landmarks.
649. While repelling the challenge to the First Constitutional Amendment
which was passed in June 1951, this Court held in Sri Sankari Prasad Singh
Deo v. Union of India and State of Bihar that the power of amendment
conferred by Article 368 was not subject to any limitations, express or
implied, and that fundamental rights were within the sweep of the amending
power. The Seventeenth Constitutional Amendment passed in June 1964
was similarly upheld by a majority decision of this Court in Sajjan Singh v.
State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0052/1964 : [1965]1SCR933 which took the
view that the fundamental rights were not intended by the framers of the
Constitution to be finally and immutably settled when the Constitution was
passed. But the Seventeenth Amendment came to be challenged once again in I.C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0029/1967 : [1967]2SCR762 . By a majority of 6 :5, this Court held that the Seventeenth Amendment
was ultra vires the Parliament's power to amend the Constitution. Five out of
the six learned Judges held that Article 368 did not confer any power to
amend but merely prescribed the procedure for amendment. The sixth
learned Judge held that Article 368 did contain the power of amendment but
that the Parliament must amend Article 368 to convoke another Constituent
Assembly, pass a law under item 97 of List I of Schedule 7 to call a
Constituent Assembly and then that Assembly may be able to abridge or
take away the Fundamental Rights if desired.
650. The decision in Golak Nath's case raised a debate of national
dimensions as the Parliament's power to amend the Constitution so as to
abridge or take away the fundamental rights virtually became a dead letter.
Under the majority judgment, the Constituent Assembly alone, called by
virtue of a law to be passed under Entry 97 of List I, could abridge or take
away the fundamental rights. The Parliament, in a resolve to reaffirm its
powers, passed the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act on
November 5, 1971 and the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act on
April 20, 1972. By the 24th Amendment, the Parliament amended Articles
13 and 368 of the Constitution so as to provide that nothing contained in
Article 13 shall apply to any amendment of the Constitution made under
Article 368 and that notwithstanding anything in the Constitution,
Parliament may, in the exercise of its constituent power, amend by way of
addition, variation or repeal any provision of the Constitution in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Article 368. As an instance of the
amendatory power re-acquired under the 24th Amendment, Parliament, by
the 25th Amendment, substituted a new Clause (2) in Article 31 and
introduced a new Article 31-C in the Constitution. By the 29th Amendment,
Parliament placed the Kerala Law Reforms (Amendment) Acts of 1969 and
1971 in the Ninth Schedule.
651. A Bench of thirteen Judges of this Court sat to consider the
Constitutionality of the 24th, 25th and 29th Amendments. The eleven
judgments delivered in that case are reported in Kesavananda Bharti v.
State of Kerala MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 commonly known as
the Fundamental Rights case. Golak Nath's case stood over ruled as a result
of the decision in. this case. But six learned Judges out of the thirteen (Sikri,
C.J. and Shelat, Grover, Hegde, Reddy and Mukherjea, JJ.) accepted the
contention of the petitioners that though Article 368 conferred the power to
amend the Constitution, there were inherent or implied limitations on the
power of amendment and therefore, Article 368 did not confer power to
amend the Constitution so as to damage or destroy the essential elements
or basic features of the Constitution. Fundamental Rights, being a part of
the essential features of the Constitution, could not therefore be abrogated
or emasculated in the exercise of the power conferred by Article 368,
though a reasonable abridgement of those rights could be effected in the
public interest. Brother Khanna, J. found it difficult, in, face of the clear
words of Article 368, to exclude from their operation the articles relating to
fundamental right in Part III of the Constitution. But proceeding to consider
"the scope of the power of amendment under Article 368", the learned
Judge held that the power to amend did not include the power to abrogate
the Constitution, that the word "amendment" postulates that the old
Constitution must survive without loss of identity, that the old Constitution
must accordingly be retained though in the amended form, and therefore
the power of amendment does not include the power to destroy or abrogate
the basic structure or framework of the Constitution. The remaining six
Judges took the view that there were no limitations of any kind on the
power of amendment, though three of them seemed willing to foresee the
limitation that the entire Constitution could not be abrogated, leaving behind
a State without a Constitution. Some scholars have clapped and some
scholars have scoffed at the decision in the Fundamental Rights case. These
criticisms, I cannot deny, cause a flutter in the ivory tower. But by Article
141 of the Constitution, the law declared by the Supreme Court is binding
on all courts within the territory of India. The law declared by the majority
of 7 :6 in the Fundamental Rights case must therefore be accepted by us,
dutifully and without reserve as good law. The history of law courts abounds
with memorable decisions based on a thin majority.
652. These appeals have therefore to be decided in the light of the principle
emerging from the majority decision in the Fundamental Rights case that
Article 368 does not confer power on the Parliament to alter the basic
structure or framework of the Constitution. Arguments of the learned
Counsel appearing on both sides have taken many forms and shapes but
they ultimately converge on the central theme of basic structure.
653. I would Ike first to deal with the Constitutional validity of the 39th
Amendment. On that question, the arguments of Mr. Shanti Bhushan, who
appears for Shri Raj Narain, may be summed up thus : (i) The 39th
Amendment affects the basic structure or framework or the institutional
pattern adopted by the Constitution and is therefore beyond the amending
power conferred by Article 368. It destroys the identity of the Constitution,
(ii) Separation of powers is a basic feature of the Constitution and therefore
every dispute involving the adjudication of legal rights must be left to the
decision of the judiciary. Clause (4) of Article 329-A introduced by the 39th
Amendment takes away that jurisdiction and is therefore void. (iii) The
function of the legislature is to legislate and not decide private disputes. In
the instant case the Constituent Assembly has transgressed its constituent
function by adjudicating upon a private dispute. (iv) Democracy is an
essential feature of the Constitution. Free and fair elections are
indispensable for the successful working of any democratic government. By
providing that the election of the Prime Minister shall not be open to
challenge and shall continue to be valid despite the judgment of the
Allahabad High Court holding that the election is vitiated by corrupt
practices, the Constituent Assembly has destroyed the very core of
democracy (v) Equality is an essential feature of a Republican Constitution.
The 39th Amendment puts the Prime Minister and the Speaker above the
law and beyond the reach of the equality principle. The classification made
by the 39th Amendment bears no nexus with the sort of immunity granted
to two high personages, from the operation of election laws. (vi) Rule of law
and judicial review are also basic features of the Constitution. To free certain
persons from the constraints of law and to place their conduct beyond
judicial review is to destroy the identity of the Constitution. No freedom is
secure without the court to protect it. The organic balance between the
three branches, the legislature, executive and the judiciary, is upset by
eroding the authority of the Supreme Court in a vital matter like elections.
And the Rule of Law is abrogated by providing that the election of the Prime
Minister shall continue to be valid and will be open to no challenge before
any court or any authority whatsoever. (vii) The concept of political justice
recognized by the Preamble is violated by the 39th Amendment. The
Constitution can always be subverted by revolutionary methods. The
question is whether it is permissible to the Parliament to use the legitimacy
of Constitutional provisions for effecting revolutionary changes, (viii) The
constituent power partakes of legislative power and can only be exercised
within the highest ambit of the latter power. therefore, even with a two-third
majority, the constituent body cannot exercise executive or judicial power.
For example, the power to appoint or dismiss a Government servant or the
power to declare war which are executive powers cannot be exercised by
the Constituent Assembly. Similarly, it cannot, in the guise of amending the
Constitution, provide that an accused arraigned before a criminal court shall
be acquitted and shall be deemed to be innocent. The constituent body can
make changes in the conditions of the exercise of judicial power but it
cannot usurp that power; and lastly, (ix) The question in the Fundamental
Rights case was whether Parliament can, in the exercise of its power of
amendment abridge or take away Fundamental Rights and whether there
are any inherent or implied limitations on the Parliament's power of
amendment. In other words, the question was whether the power of
amendment can be exercised so as to destroy or mutilate the basic
structure of the Constitution. The Fundamental Rights case did not involve
the consideration of the question as to what the power of amendment
comprehends. Promoting and demoting Government servants, passing and
failing students who have appeared in an examination, granting or
withdrawing building contracts and last but not the least, declaring who has
won and who has lost an election are matters clearly outside the scope of
the amending power under Article 368, which means and implies the power
to alter the fundamental instrument of country's governance.
654. Learned Counsel appearing for the Union of India and for Smt. Indira
Gandhi did not dispute the contention that the appeals before, us must be
disposed of on the basis of the law laid down by the majority in the
Fundamental Rights case.
655. The learned Attorney General contended that : (i) The majority
decision in the Fundamental Rights case is not an authority for the
proposition that there could be no free or fair elections without judicial
review. The Constitutions and laws of several countries leave the decision of
election disputes to the judgment of the legislatures themselves. The history
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as also various articles in our
Constitution show that judicial review can be excluded in appropriate cases
as a matter of policy, (ii) That validation of elections is a process well-known
to democratic forms of Government, (iii) That a law may be Constitutional
even if it relates to a single individual if on account of special reasons, the
single individual could be treated as a class by himself, (iv) That it is clear
from Articles 326 and 327 of the Constitution that the Constitution makers
thought that as a matter of high policy elections ought to be dealt with by
the Constitution itself and not by ordinary legislation passed within the
framework of the Constitution. How much of elections should be dealt with
by the Constitution and how much should be relegated to ordinary
legislation is not a matter for the courts to decide. If the constituent body
thought that the offices of the Prime Minister and the Speaker are important
enough to be dealt with by the Constitution itself in the matter of their
elections to the Parliament, it cannot be said that the decision is frivolous or
without jurisdiction; and that (v) The contention that the 39th Amendment
is not an exercise of constituent power should not be allowed to be taken up
because every possible aspect of the matter was argued in Sankari Prasad's
case, Sajjan Singh's case and the Fundamental Rights case. The basic
question involved in these cases was as to what is the meaning of the word
'amendment'. The argument now is that there is a further limitation on the
amending power. If it is the same question and has been decided, it cannot
be reopened by saying that the question has a new aspect which was not
considered then. If the question is new, the principle of the Fundamental
Rights case cannot be extended any further. therefore, the constituent
power must be held to be a plenary power on which the only limitation is as
regards the inviolability of the basic structure.
656. The learned Solicitor-General who continued the unfinished arguments
of the learned Attorney-General urged that (i) Article 14 is founded on a
sound public policy recognised and followed in all civilised States The
exclusion of judicial review does not by itself mean the negation of equality.
Article 31-B which on the face of it denied equality to different sections of
the community attained the ideal of economic justice by bringing about
economic equality. Article 33 also shows that the demands of public
problems may require the adjustment of Fundamental Rights for ensuring
greater equality. (ii) What a Constitution should contain depends on what
permanency is intended to be accorded to a particular provision included in
the Constitution. (iii) Exclusion of judicial review is at least permissible in
those fields where originally the Constitution did not provide for or
contemplate judicial review. (iv) If the election law does not apply, as it
ceases to apply by virtue of Article 329-A(4), it is the function of the.
legislature to declare whether or not a particular election is good or bad;
and that Rule of Law is not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution
and apart from Article 14, our Constitution recognises neither the doctrine of
equality nor the Rule of Law.
657. Shri A.K. Sen who appears for Smt. Indira Gandhi defended the 39th
Amendment by contending that : (i) The Amendment follows the well-known
pattern of all validation Acts by which the basis of judgments or orders of
competent courts and Tribunals is changed and the judgments and orders
are made ineffective. (ii) The effect of validation is to change the law so as
to alter the basis of any judgment, which might have been given on the
basis of old law and thus to make the Judgment ineffective. (iii) A formal
declaration that the judgment rendered under the old Act is void, is not
necessary. If the matter is pending in appeal, the appellate court has to give
effect to the altered law and reverse the judgment. If the matter is not
pending in appeal, then the judgment ceases to be operative and binding as
res judicata. (iv) The rendering of a judgment ineffective by changing its
basis by legislative enactment is not an encroachment on judicial power but
a legislation within the competence of the legislature rendering the basis of
the judgment nonest. (v) The constituent power has retrospectively changed
the law in so far as it relates to election. The constituent authority could
have left the application of the changed law either to Parliament or to any
other body. But it has chosen to assume the duty of determination in this
particular case for itself. (vi) The determination of election disputes and the
validity of elections is not an exercise of judicial power. This function may be
left either to courts, properly so-called or to Tribunals or to other bodies
including the legislature itself, (vii) The rigid separation of powers as it
obtains in the United States or in a lesser degree under the Australian
Constitution does not apply to India. Many powers, which are strictly
judicial, have been excluded from the purview of the courts. There is,
therefore, no question of any separation of powers being involved in matters
concerning elections and election petitions. (viii) There is no question of
separation of powers when the constituent authority exercises either a
power which is allocated to the Legislature, or to the . Executive or to the
Judiciary under the Constitution. In the hands of the constituent authority
there is no demarcation of powers. But the demarcation emerges only when
it leaves the hands of the constituent authority through well-defined
channels into demarcated pools. The constituent power is independent of
the fetters of limitations imposed by separation of powers in the hands of
the organs of the Government, amongst whom the supreme authority of the
State is allocated. (ix) The. Constituent power springs as the fountainhead
and partakes of sovereignty and is the power which creates the organs and
distributes the powers. therefore, in a sense, the constituent power is all-
embracing and is at once judicial, executive and legislative. It is, in a sense,
a "super power". (x) Even if the preamble lays down as its objective the
attainment of equality, the 39th Constitution Amendment does not violate
the said concept of equality as the same is based on a rational classification
and has a reasonable nexus with the object of the Amendment. (xi) The
Preamble to the Constitution only refers to securing "equality of status and
opportunity." Equality of status and opportunity has got many facets : some
of these facets are guaranteed as fundamental rights under Articles 14 to 18
of the Constitution. These facets alone can be considered to be basic
features of the Constitution, assuming that equality was a basic feature of
the Constitution. (xii) 'Free and fair election" "does not postulate that there
must be a Constitutional provision for determining election disputes by a
separate Tribunal or Court. (xiii) The 39th Amendment Act does not affect
the structure of a Republican Democracy, assuming that the same is a basic
feature of the Constitution. The validation of one election does not alter the
character of the democracy; and (xiv) A Constitutional amendment need not
necessarily relate to the structural organisation of the State.
658. Shri Jagannath Kaushal supported the arguments of Shri Sen by citing
pragmatic illustrations. He gave interesting statistics showing that a very
small percentage of election petitions succeed eventually which, according
to him, is evidence that such petitions are used by defeated candidates as
an instrument of oppression against successful candidates. Parliament,
therefore, wanted to save high personages from such harassment. A law
may benefit a single individual and may still be valid. According to Shri
Kaushal, the judgment of the Allahabad High Court became a nullity by
reason of that Court ceasing retrospectively to have jurisdiction over the
dispute and a judgment which is a nullity need not be set aside. It can even
be challenged in a collateral proceeding.
659. I thought it only fair to indicate broadly the line of approach adopted
by the various learned Counsel to the question as regards the validity of the
39th Amendment. It will serve no useful purpose to take up each one of the
points for separate consideration and indeed many an argument is inter-
related. It would be enough for my purpose to deal with what I consider to
be points of fundamental importance, especially as my learned Brethren
have dealt with the other points.
660. This Court has strictly adhered to the view that in Constitutional
matters one must decide no more than is strictly necessary for an effective
adjudication of the points arising in any case. By that test, a numerically
substantial part of the 39th Amendment has to be deferred for consideration
to a future occasion. We are clearly not concerned in these appeals with the
new Article 71 introduced by the 39th Amendment, which deals with the
election of the President and the Vice-President. We are concerned with the
new Article 329-A but not with the whole of it. Clauses (1) to (3) of that
article deal with future events and the validity of those clauses may,
perhaps, be examined when those events come to happen. Clauses (4) to
(6) of Article 329-A are the ones that are relevant for our purpose and I
propose to address myself to the validity of those provisions.
661. Clause (4) of Article 329-A, which is the real focus of controversy, may
conveniently be split up as follows for under standing its true nature and
effect : (i) The Laws made by Parliament prior to August 10, 1975 in so far
as they relate to election petitions and matters connected therewith cease to
apply to the Parliamentary election of Smt. Indira Gandhi which took place
in 1971. (ii) Such Laws are repealed retrospectively in so far as they
governed the aforesaid election, with the result that they must never be
deem ed to have applied to that election. (iii) Such an election cannot be
declared to be void on any of the grounds on which it could have been
declared to be void under the Laws which were in force prior to August 10,
1975. (iv) The election shall not be deemed ever to have become void on
any ground on which, prior to August 10, 1975 it was declared to be void.
(v) The election shall continue to be valid in all respects notwithstanding the
judgment of any court, which includes the judgment dated June 12, 1975 of
the High Court of Allahabad. (vi) The judgment of the Allahabad High Court
and any finding on which the judgment and order of that court is based axe
void and shall be deemed always to have been void.
662. Shri Shanti Bhushan has, as it were, a preliminary objection to the
39th Amendment that the election of a private individual and the dispute
concerning it cannot ever be a matter of Constitutional amendment.
Whether this contention is sound is another matter but I do not see the
force of the argument of the Attorney-General that in view of the decisions
in Sankari Prasad's case, Sajjan Singh's case and the Fundamental Rights
case, the contention is not open to be taken. The question raised by Shri
Shanti Bhushan was net raised or considered in either of the three aforesaid
cases and I do not see how the question can be shelved. The argument is
not a new facet of the theory of inherent or Implied limitations on the
amending power, in which case it might have been plausible to contend that
the last word was said on the subject by the Full Court in the Fundamental
Rights case. The question now raised touches a totally new dimension of the
amending power : Can the Constituent Assembly, while amending the
Constitution, pronounce upon private disputes or must it only concern itself
with what may be termed organisational matters concerning the country's
governance ? The question has the merit of novelty, but I see no substance
in it. But I must clarify that I prefer to examine the point in isolation, that is,
divorced from considerations arising from the theory of separation of
powers. Whether the amendment constitutes an encroachment on judicial
functions and thereby damages one of the basic structures of the
Constitution may best be examined separately. The reason why' I see no
substance in Shri Shanti Bhushan's contention is that what the Constitution
ought to contain is not for the Courts to decide. The touchstone of the
validity of a Constitutional amendment is firstly whether the procedure
prescribed by Article 368 is strictly complied with and secondly whether the
amendment destroys or damages the basic structure of the Constitution.
The subject-matter of Constitutional amendments is a question of high
policy and Courts are concerned with the interpretation of laws, not with the
wisdom of the policy underlying them. I do not see why the Constitution
cannot be amended so as to provide that wagering contracts shall be void or
that bigamous marriages shall be unlawful or that economic offenders shall
be visited with a higher penalty. The Indian Constitution is not like the
American Constitution an instrument of few words. The range of topics it
covers would bemuse any student of foreign Constitutions which do not
even skirt the problems with which our Constitution deals in copious details.
In fact, there is hardly any important facet of national life which our
Constitution does not touch. Along with matters of high priority like
citizenship. Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles of State policy and the
relations between the Union and the States it deals with maters not
normally considered Constitutionally important like the salaries of high
dignitaries, the power of the Supreme Court to frame rules for regulating its
practice and procedure, official language for communication between one
State and another and last but not the least, elections to the Parliament and
the State Legislatures. Those to whose wisdom and judgment the
constituent power is confided, will evoke scorn and derision if that power is
used for granting or withdrawing building contracts, passing or failing
students or granting and denying divorces. But the electorate lives in the
hope that a sacred power will not so flagrantly be abused and the moving
finger of history warns of the consequences that inevitably flow when
absolute power has corrupted absolutely. The fear of perversion is no test of
power.
663. But the comparison is odious between the instances given by Shri
Shanti Bhushan and the subject-matter of Article 329-A(4) of the
Constitution. In the first place, elections to legislatures were considered by
Constitution-makers to be a matter of Constitutional importance. Secondly,
though the powers of the Prime Minister in a cabinet form of democracy are
not as unrivalled as those of the President in the American system, it is
undeniable that the Prime Minister occupies a unique position. The choice of
the subject for Constitutional amendment cannot, therefore, be
characterized as trifling, frivolous or outside the frame-work of a copious
Constitution. In America, the challenge to the 18th Amendment on the
ground that ordinary legislation cannot be embodied in a Constitutional
amendment was brushed aside as unworthy of serious attention.
Rottschaefer endorsed it as consistent with the ultimate political theory on
which the American Constitutional system is based. "The people, acting
through the machinery provided by the existing Constitution, must be
accorded the legal power to change their basic law by peaceable means."
Rottschaefer on Constitutional Law (Ed 19391 Page 397. In fact, it is wrong
to think that elections to the country's legislatures are a private affair of the
contestants. They are matters of public interest and of national importance.
Every citizen has a stake in legislative elections for his social and economic
well-being depends upon the promises and performance of the legislatOrs.
Such elections, and more so the election of the Prime Minister who is at
least primus inter pares, can legitimately form the subject-matter of a
Constitutional provision. The (sic)ndity of what is brought into the
Constitution has to be judged by different standards.
664. There was some discussion at the Bar as to which features of the
Constitution form the basic structure of the Constitution according to the
majority decision in the Fundamental Rights case. That, to me. is an inquiry
both fruitless and irrelevant. The ratio of the majority decision is not that
some named features of the Constitution are a part of its basic structure but
that the power of amendment cannot be exercised so as to damage or
destroy the essential elements or the basic structure of the Constitution,
whatever these expressions may comprehend.
Sikri, C.J., mentions supremacy of the Constitution, Republican and
Democratic form of the Government, secular character of the Constitution,
separation of powers, federalism and dignity and freedom of the individual
as essential features of the Constitution. Shelat and Grover, JJ., have added
to the list two other features; the mandate to build a welfare State and
unity and integrity of the Nation. Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. added
sovereignty of India as a fundamental feature of the Constitution. Reddy, J.,
thought that a sovereign democratic republic, Parliamentary democracy and
the three organs of the State form the basic structure of the Constitution.
Khanna, J., held that fundamental rights are not a part of the basic structure
and therefore they can be abrogated like many other provisions. He
observed that basic structure indicates the broad outlines of the Constitution
and since the right to property is a matter of details, it is not a part of that
structure. The democratic form of Government, the secular character of the
State and possibly judicial review are according to Brother Khanna a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution. It is obvious that these are merely
illustrations of what constitutes the basic structure and are not intended to
be exhaustive. Shelat and Grover, JJ., Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. and Reddy,
J., say in their judgments that their list of essential features which form the
basic structure of the Constitution is illustrative or incomplete. For
determining whether a particular feature of the Constitution is a part of its
basic structure, one has perforce to examine in each individual case the
place of the particular feature in the scheme of our Constitution, its object
and purpose, and the consequences of its denial on the integrity of the
Constitution as a fundamental instrument of country's governance. But it is
needless for the purpose of these appeals to ransack every nook and cranny
of the Constitution to discover the bricks of the basic structure. Those that
are enumerated in the majority judgments are massive enough to cover the
requirements of Shri Shanti Bhushan's challenge.
665. I consider it beyond the pale of reasonable controversy that if there be
any unamendable features of the Constitution on the score that they form a
part of the basic structure of the Constitution, they are that : (i) India is a
Sovereign Democratic Republic; (ii) Equality of status and opportunity shall
be secured to all its citizens;
(iii) The State shall have no religion of its own and all persons shall be
equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess,
practise and propagate religion
and that (iv) the Nation shall be governed by a Government of laws not of
men. These, in my opinion, are the pillars of our Constitutional philosophy,
the pillars, therefore, of the basic structure of the Constitution.
666. I find it impossible to subscribe to the view that the Preamble of the
Constitution holds the key to its basic structure or that the preamble is too
holy to suffer a human touch. Constitutions are written, if they are written in
the rarefied atmosphere of high ideology, what-ever be the ideology.
Preambles of writ-ten Constitutions are intended primarily to reflect the
hopes and aspirations of people. They resonate the ideal which the Nation
seeks to achieve, the target, not the achievement. In parts, therefore, they
are metaphysical like slogans. For example, the concept of Fraternity which
is referred to in our Preamble is not carried into any provision of the
Constitution and the concept is hardly suitable for encasement in a coercive
legal formula. The Preamble, generally, uses words of "Passion and power"
in order to move the hearts of men and to stir them into action.
Constitutional Law of India,(1975) 2 Ed 76-H. M. Seervai. Its own meaning
and implication being in doubt, the Preamble cannot affect or throw light on
the meaning of the en-acting words of the Constitution. (1957) AC 436.
There-fore, though our Preamble was voted upon and is a part of the
Constitution, it is really "a preliminary statement of the reasons" which
made the passing of the Constitution necessary and desirable. Halsbury's
Laws of England, 3rd Ed., p. 370, para 343. As observed by Gajendragadkar,
J., in In re : Berubari Union and Exchange of Enclaves what Willoughby has
said about the Preamble to the American Constitution, namely, that it has
never been regarded as the source of any substantive power, is equally true
about the prohibitions and limitations. The Preamble of our Constitution
cannot therefore be regarded as a source of any prohibitions or limitations.
667. Judicial review, according to Shri Shanti Bhushan is a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution and since the 39th Amendment by Article
329A(4) and (5) deprives the courts, including the Supreme Court, of their
power to adjudicate upon the disputed election, the Amendment is
unconstitutional. The fundamental premise of this argument is too broadly
stated because the Constitution, as originally enacted, expressly excluded
judicial review in a large variety of important matters. Articles 31(4), 31(6),
136(2), 227(4), 262(2) and 329(a) are some of the instances in point. True,
that each of these provisions has a purpose behind it but these provisions
show that the Constitution did not regard judicial review as an indispensable
measure of the legality or propriety of every determination. Article 136(2)
expressly took away the power of the Supreme Court to grant special leave
to appeal from the decisions of any court or Tribunal constituted by a law
relating to the Armed Forces. Article 262(2) authorized the Parliament to
make a law providing that the Supreme Court or any other court shall have
no jurisdiction over certain river disputes. But what is even more to the
point are the provisions contained in Articles 103(1) and 329(b). Article 102
prescribes disqualifications for membership of the Parliament. By Article
103(1), any question arising under Article 102 as to whether a member of
the Parliament has become subject to any disqualification has to be referred
to the President whose decision is final. The President is required by Article
103(2) to obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and act according
to its opinion. Thus, in a vital matter pertaining to the election for
membership of the Parliament, the framers of the Constitution had left the
decision to the judgment of the executive. Articles 327 and 328 give power
to the Parliament and the State legislatures to provide by law for all matters
relating to elections to the respective legislatures including the preparation
of electoral rolls and the delimitation of constituencies. By Article 329(a).
the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the
allotment of seats to such constituencies cannot be called in question in any
court.
668. The provision contained in Article 329(b) is decisive on the question
under consideration. That article provides that no election to the Parliament
or the State legislature shall be called in question except by an election
petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may be provided
for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature. It was
therefore open to the legislature to leave the adjudication of election
disputes to authorities other than those in the hierarchy of our judicial
system. In fact, until the passing of the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Act, 47 of 1966, by which High Courts were given jurisdiction
to try election petitions, that jurisdiction was vested first in a tribunal
consisting of three members and later in a tribunal consisting of a single
member who was to be a sitting District Judge. The decisions of those
tribunals could eventually be brought before the Supreme Court under
Article 136(1) of the Constitution but it is at least plausible that were the
Legislatures to pass laws leaving the decision of election disputes to
themselves. judicial review might have stood excluded. Since the
Constitution, as originally enacted, did not consider that judicial power must
intervene in the interests of purity of elections, judicial review cannot be
considered to be a part of the basic structure in so far as legislative
elections are concerned. The theory of Basic Structure has to be considered
in each individual case, not in the abstract, but in the context of the
concrete problem. The problem here is whether under our Constitution,
judicial review was considered as an indispensable concomitant of elections
to country's legislatures. The answer, plainly, is No.
669. In England, prior to 1770, controverted elections were tried by the
whole House of Common s as mere party questions but in order "to prevent
so notorious a perversion of justice", the House consented to submit the
exercise of its privilege to a Tribunal composed of its own members. See
May's Parliamentary Practice, 18th Ed., pp. 29,30. In 1868, the jurisdiction
of the House to try election petitions was transferred by statute to the
Courts of Law. A Parliamentary election petition is now tried by two judges
from out of three puisne judges of the Queen's Bench Division who are put
on the rota for trial of such petitions by selection every year by a majority of
votes of the Judges of that Division. At the conclusion of the trial, the Court
must forthwith certify the determination to the Speaker. The determination,
upon such certification, is final to all intents and purposes. Thus, in England,
the Election Court is constituted by a special method it exercises a
jurisdiction out of the ordinary jurisdiction which is normally exercised by
Courts of Law and its determination acquires finality upon certification to the
Speaker of the House of Commons. No appeal lies against the decision of
the Election Court save by leave of the Court and if leave is granted, the
decision of the Court of Appeal is final and conclusive. See Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Ed., Vol. 14, p. 250 (para 436); p. 311 (para. 562); p. 324 (para. 591).
670. Under Article 1, Section 5, Clause 1 of the American Constitution, each
House is the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its own
mem-bers. Each House, in judging of elections under this clause, acts as a
judicial tribunal. See The Constitution of the U.S.A. Lester Jayson (1973).
Any further review of the decisions of the two Houses seems impermissible.
671. I am therefore, unable to accept the contention that Articles 329-A(4)
and (5) are unconstitutional on the ground that by those provisions, the
election of the Prime Minister is placed beyond the purview of courts.
672. Equally, there is no sub-stance in the contention that the relevant
clauses of the 39th Amendment are in total derogation of 'political justice'
and are accordingly unconstitutional. The concept of political justice of which
the Preamble speaks is too vague and nebulous to permit by its yardstick
the invalidation of a Constitutional amendment. The Preamble, as indicated
earlier, is neither a source of power nor of limitation.
673. The contention that 'Democracy' is an essential feature of the
Constitution is unassailable. It is therefore, necessary to see whether the
impugned provisions of the 39th Amendment damage or destroy that
feature. The learned Attorney-General saw an unsurmountable impediment
in the existence of various forms of democracies all over the world and he
asked : What kind and form of democracy constitutes a part of our basic
structure ? The cabinet system. the Presidential system the French, the
Russian or any other ? This approach seeks to make the issue unrealistically
complex. If the democratic form of government is the corner-stone of our
Constitution, the basic feature is the broad form of democracy that was
known to Our Nation when the Constitution was enacted, with such
adjustments and modifications as exigencies may demand but not so as to
leave the mere husk of a popular rule. Democracy is not a dogmatic doctrine
and no one can suggest that a rule is authoritarian because some rights and
safeguards available to the people at the inception of its Constitution have
been abridged or abrogated or because, as the result of a Constitutional
amendment, the form of government does not strictly comport with some
classical definition of the concept. The needs of the Nation may call for
severe abnegation. though never the needs of the Rulers and evolutionary
changes in the fundamental law of the country do not necessarily destroy
the basic structure of its government. What does the law live for, if it is dead
to living needs ? We cannot therefore, as lawyers and Judges, generalize on
what constitutes 'Democracy' though we all know the highest form of that
idealistic concept-the state of bliss-in political science,
674. The question for consideration is whether the provisions contained in
Articles 329-A (4) and (5) are destructive of the democratic form of
government. The answer does not lie in comparisons with what is happening
in other Darts of the world, those that stake their claim to 'democracy',
because we are not concerned to find whether despite the 39th Amendment
we are still not better off. democratically, than many others. The comparison
has to be between the pre-39th amendment period and the post-39th
Amendment period in the context of our Constitution.
675. "Those of us who have learn ed humility have given over the attempts
to define law". This statement of Max Radin "A Restatement of Honfeld".
Harvard Law Review (1938). 51. PP. 1141 may be used to express a similar
difficulty in defining 'Democracy' but just as legal scholars, not lacking in
humility, have attempted to define 'Law', so have political scientists
attempted a satisfactory definition of 'Democracy'. The expression is derived
from the Greek word 'Demos', which was often used by the Greeks to
describe the many, as distinct from the few, rather than the people as a
whole. And Aristotle defined democracy as the rule of the poor, simply
because they formed, always and necessarily, the more numerous class. But
the word is common ly used "in the sense of the rule of the majority of the
community as a whole, including 'classes' and 'masses' since that is the only
method yet discovered for determining what is deemed to be the will of a
body politic which is not unanimous. This will is expressed through the
election of representatives". Modern Political Constitutions by C. F. Strong :
(E. L. B. S. Ed,. 2nd Impression, 1970). p. 172. C. F. Strong defines
democracy to mean "that form of government in which the ruling power of a
State is legally vested, not in any particular class or classes, but in the
members of a community as a whole". This may more aptly be called a
description rather than a definition of democracy because it is beyond
human ingenuity to foresee the possible permutations and combinations of
circumstances to which a generalisation may have to be applied,
676. Forgetting mere words which Tennyson said : 'Like Nature, half reveal
and half conceal the Soul within', the substance of the matter is the rule of
the majority and the manner of ascertaining the will of the majority is
through the process of elections. I find myself unable to accept that the
impugned provisions destroy the democratic structure of our government.
The rule is still the rule of the majority despite the 39th Amendment and no
law or amendment of the fundamental instrument has provided for the
abrogation of the electoral process. In fact it is through that process that
the electorate expressed its preference for Smt. Indira Gandhi over Shri Raj
Narain and others. Article 326 of the Constitution by which the elections to
the house of the People and to the State Legislative Assemblies shall be on
the basis of Adult Suffrage still stands, Article 79 which provides that "There
shall be a Parliament which shell consist of two Houses", Articles 80 and 81
which prescribe the composition of the two Houses, Article 83 which
provides for the duration of the Houses, Article 85 which directs that six
months shall not inter vene between the two sessions of Parliament, Article
100(1) which provides that all questions shall be determined by a majority
of votes of the members present and voting, article 105 which preserves the
powers and privileges of the members of Parliament and the counterparts of
these articles in regard to State Legislatures retain their pristine primacy.
These articles, unimpaired as they remain even after the 39th Amendment,
are enough assurance that the Parliament is not leading the country to a
totalitarian path.
677. This is not to put a seal of approval on the immunity conferred on any
election but it is hard to generalize from a single instance that such an
isolated act of immunity has destroyed or threatens to destroy the
democratic frame-work of our government. One swallow does not make a
summer. The swallow with its pointed wings, forked ' tail, a curving flight
and twittering cry is undoubtedly a harbinger of summer but to see all these
in the 39th Amendment and to argue that the summer of a totalitarian rule
is knocking at the threshold is to take an unduly alarmist view of the
political scene as painted by the amendment. Very often, as said by Sir
Frederick Pollock, "If there is any real danger it is of the alarmist's own
making". Ethics and Morals (Essays in Jurisprudence). p. 303.
678. The 39th Amendment is however, open to grave objection on other
grounds, in so far as Clauses (4) and (5) of Article 329-A are concerned.
Generality and equality are two indelible characteristics of justice
administered according to law., The Preamble to our Constitution by which
"the people of India resolved solemnly to secure to all its citizens equality of
status and opportunity finds its realization in an ampler measure in Article
14 which guarantees equality before the law and the equal protection of
laws to all persons, citizens and non-citizens alike. Equality is the faith and
creed of our Democratic Republic and without it, neither the Constitution nor
the laws made under it could reflect the common conscience of those who
owe allegiance to them. And if they did not, they would fail to command
respect and obedience without which any Constitution would be doomed to
founder on the rocks of revolution. A Constitution which, without a true
nexus, denies equality before the law to its citizens may in a form thinly
disguised. contain reprisals directed against private individuals in matters of
private rights and wrongs. The English Acts of Attainder beginning with the
one passed by the English Parliament in 1459 after the commencement of
the wars of Roses or the 'Privilegium' in Rome are only some of the historical
instances in point. Speaking of Bracton's famous pass-age which contains
the admonition that the King ought to be under the law because the law
makes him King, Sir Frederick Pollock says that there you have in a nutshell
the great point of Constitutional freedom that law is not merely the
instrument of Government, but the safeguard of each individual citizen's
public rights and liberties. Jurisprudence and Legal Essays (1964). p. 195
679. Article 329-A(4) makes the existing election laws retrospectively
inapplicable, in a very substantial measure, to the Parliamentary elections of
the Prime Minister and the Speaker. The inapplicability of such laws creates
a legal vacuum because the repeal, so to say. of existing laws is only a step-
in-aid to free the election from the restraints and obligations of all election
laws, indeed of all laws. The plain intendment and meaning of Clause (4) is
that the election of the : two personages will be beyond the reach of any
law, past or present. What follows is a neat logical corollary. The election of
the Prime Minister could not be declared void as there was no law to apply
to that election; the judgment of the Allahabad High Court declaring the
election void is itself void; and, the election continues to be valid as it was
before the High Court pronounced its judgment.
680. These provisions are an out-right negation of the right of equality
conferred by Article 14. a right which more than any other is a basic
postulate of our Constitution. It is true that the right, though expressed in
an absolute form is hedged in by a judge-made restriction that it is open to
the Legislature to make a reasonable classification so that the same law will
not apply to all persons alike or different laws may govern the rights and
obligations of different persons falling within distinct classes. The boast of
Law that it is no respecter of persons is the despair of drawers of waters and
hewers of wood who clamour for a differential treatment. The judge takes
that boast to mean that in an egalitarian society no person can be above the
law and that justice must be administer ed with an even hand to those who
are situated equally. In other words, all who are equal are equal in the eye
of Law and it will not accord a favoured treat ment to persons within the
same class. Laws, as Plato said, would operate "like an obstinate and
ignorant tyrant if they imposed inflexible rules without allowing for changed
circumstances or exceptional cases." See "The Sense of Injustice" by
Edmond Cahn (1964). p. 461 in which the reference is made to Plato's
'Politicus'. p. 294.
681. This Court, at least since the days of Anwar Ali Sarkar's case
MANU/SC/0033/1952 : 1952CriLJ510 , has consistently taken the view that
the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which
distinguishes those who are grouped together from those who are left out
and that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to
be achieved by the particular law. The first test may be assumed to be
satisfied since there is no gainsaying that in our system of Government, the
Prime Minister occupies a unique position. But what is the nexus of that
uniqueness with the law which provides that the election of the Prime
Minister and the Speaker to the Parliament will be above all laws, that the
election will be governed by no norms or standards applicable to all others
who contest that election and that a election declared to be void by a High
Court judgment shall be deemed to be valid, the judgment and its findings
being themselves required to be deemed to be void ? Such is not the
doctrine of classification and no facet of that doctrine can support the
favoured treatment accorded by the 39th Amendment to two high
personages. It is the common man's sense of justice which sustains
democracies and there is a fear that the 39th Amendment, by its impugned
part, may outrage that sense of justice. Different rules may apply to
different conditions and classes of men and even a single individual may, by
his uniqueness, form a class by himself. But in the absence of a differentia
reasonably related to the object of the law, justice must be administered
with an even hand to all.
682. It follows that Clauses (4) and (5) of Article 329-A are arbitrary and
are calculated to damage or destroy the Rule of Law. Imperfections of
language hinder a precise definition of the Rule of Law as of the definition of
'Law' itself. And the Constitutional Law of 1975 has undergone many
changes since A. V. Dicey, the great expounder of the rule of law, delivered
his lectures as Vinerian Professor of English Law at Oxford, which were
published in 1855 under the title, 'Introduction to the Study of the Law of
the Constitution'. But so much, I suppose, can be said with reasonable
certainty that the rule of law means that the exercise of powers of
government shall be conditioned by law and that subject to the exceptions
to the doctrine of Equality, no one shall be exposed to the arbitrary will of
the Government. Dicey gave three meanings to rule of law; Absence of
arbitrary power, equality before the law or the equal subjection of all classes
to the ordinary law of the land administered by ordinary law courts and that
the Constitution is not the source but the consequence of the rights of
individuals, as defined and enforced by the Courts.
The second meaning grew out of Dicey's unsound dislike of the French Droit
Administrative which he regarded "as a misfortune inflicted upon the
benighted folk across the Channel". See Judicial Review of Administrative
Action-S.A. de Smith (1968), p. 5. Indeed, so great was his influence on the
thought of the day that as recently as in 1935 Lord Hewart, the Lord Chief
Justice of England, dismissed the term "administrative law" as "continental
Jargon". The third meaning is hardly apposite in the context of our written
Constitution for, in India, the Constitution is the source of all rights and
obligations. We may not therefore rely wholly on Dicey's exposition of the
rule of law but ever since the second World War. the rule has come to
acquire a positive content in all democratic countries. See Wade and Phillips'
Constitutional Law (Sixth Ed.), pp. 70-73. The International Commission of
Jurists, which has a consultative status under the United Nations, held its
Congress in Delhi in 1959 where lawyers, judges and law teachers
representing fifty-three countries affirmed that the rule of law is a dynamic
concept which should be employed to safeguard and advance the political
and civil rights of the individual in a free society, One of the committees of
that Congress emphasised that no law should subject any individual to
discriminatory treatment. These principles must vary from country to
country depending upon the provisions of its Constitution and indeed upon
whether. there exists a writ-ten Constitution. As it has been said in a lighter
vein. to show the supremacy of the Parliament, the charm of the English
Constitution is that "it does not exist". Our Constitution exists and must
continue to exist. It guarantees equality before law and the equal protection
of laws to every one. The denial of such equality, as modified by the
judicially evolved theory of classification, is the very negation of rule-of law.
683. The argument directed at showing the invalidation of the 39t.h
Amendment on the ground that it abrogates the principle of 'Separation of
Powers' is replete with many possibilities since it has several sidelights. But I
will be brief since I have already held that Clauses (4) and (5) of Article
329-A are unconstitutional. I cannot regard the point as unnecessary for my
determination Since the point seems to me of great Constitutional
importance.
684. The Indian Constitution was enacted by the Constituent Assembly in
the backdrop of the National struggle for Independence. The Indian people
had gone through a travail and on the attainment of Independence, the
country had to face unique problems which had not confronted other
federations like America, Australia, Canada or Switzerland. These problems
had to be solved pragmatically and not by confining the country's political
structure within the straitjacket of a known or established formula. The
Constituent Assembly, therefore, pursued the policy of pick and choose to
see what suited the genius of the Nation best. "This process produced new
modifications of established ideas about the construction of federal
governments and their relations with the governments of their constituent
units. The Assembly, in fact, produced a new kind of federalism to meet
India's peculiar needs." The Indian Constitution : Cornerstone of a Nation by
Granville Austin (1972), page 186 While introducing the Draft Constitution in
the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Ambedkar who was one of the chief architects
of the Constitution said that our Constitution avoided the tight mould of
federalism in which the American Constitution was caught and could be
"both unitary as well as federal according to the requirements of time and
circumstances". We have what may perhaps be described by the phrase,
'co-operative federalism', a concept different from the one in vogue when
the federations of United States or of Australia were set up.
685. The American Constitution provides for a rigid separation of govern
mental powers into three basic divisions the executive, legislative and
judicial. It is an essential principle of that Constitution that powers entrusted
to one department should not be exercised by any other department. The
Australian Constitution follows the same pattern of distribution of powers.
Unlike these Constitutions, the Indian Constitution does not expressly vest
the three kinds of power in three different organs of the State. But the
principle of separation of powers is not a magic formula for keeping the
three organs of the State within the strict confines of their functions. As
observed by Cardozo, J., in his dissenting opinion in Panama Refining
Company v. Ryan (1934) 293 US 388, 440 the principle of separation of
powers "is not a doctrinaire concept to be made use of with pedantic rigour.
There must be sensible approximation, there must be elasticity of
adjustment in response to the practical necessities of Govt. which cannot
foresee today the developments of tomorrow in their nearly infinite variety".
Thus, even in America, despite the theory that the legislature cannot
delegate its power to the executive. a host of rules and regulations are
passed by non-legislative bodies, which have been judicially recognised as
valid. See the judgment of Mukherjea, J., in the Delhi Laws Act case,.
686. The truth of the matter is that the existence, and the limitations on the
powers of the three departments of Government are due to the normal
process of specialisation in governmental business which becomes more and
more complex as civilization advances. The legislature must make laws, the
executive enforce them and the judiciary interpret them because they have
in their respective fields acquired an expertise which makes them competent
to discharge their duly appointed functions. The Moghal Emperor, Jehangir,
was applauded as a reformist because soon after his accession to the throne
in 1605, he got a golden chain with sixty bells hung in his palace so that the
common  man could pull it and draw the attention of the Ruler to his
grievances and sufferings. The most despotic Monarch in the modern world
prefers to be armed, even if formally with the opinion of his Judges on the
grievances of his subjects.
687. The political usefulness of the doctrine of separation of powers is now
widely recognized though a satisfactory definition of the three functions is
difficult to evolve. But the function of the Parliament is to make laws not to
decide cases. The British Parliament in its unquestioned supremacy could
enact a legislation for the settlement of a dispute or it could, with impunity,
legislate for the boiling of the Bishop of Rochester's cook. The Indian
Parliament will not direct that an accused in a pending case shall stand
acquitted or that a suit shall stand decreed. Princely India in some parts,
often did it.
688. The reason of this restraint Is not that the Indian Constitution
recognizes any rigid separation of powers. Plainly, it does not. The reason is
that the concentration of powers in any one organ may, by upsetting that
fine balance between the three organs, destroy the fundamental premises of
a democratic government to which we are pledged. Sir Carleton K. Allen
says in his 'Law and Orders' 1965 Ed. 8 that neither in Montesquieu's
analysis nor in Locke's are the governmental powers conceived as the
familiar trinity of legislative, executive and judicial powers. Montesquieu's
"separation" took the form not of impassable barriers and unalterable
frontiers, but of mutual restraints, or of what after-wards came to be known
as "checks and balances". (p. 10). The three organs must act in concert, not
that their respective functions should not ever touch one another. If this
limitation is respected and preserved, "it is impossible for that situation to
arise which Locke and Montesquieu regarded as the eclipse of liberty-the
monopoly, or the disproportionate accumulation, of power in one sphere".
(p. 19; Allen). In a federal system which distributes powers between three
co-ordinate branches of government, though not rigidly, disputes regarding
the limits of Constitutional power have to be resolved by courts and
therefore, as observed by Pa ton, "the distinction between judicial and other
powers may be vital to the maintenance of the Constitution itself". A text
book of Jurisprudence (1964), page 295. Power is of an encroaching nature,
wrote Madison in 'The Federalist'. The encroaching power which the
Federalists feared most was the legislative power and that. according to
Madison, is the danger of all republics. Allen says that the history of both
the United States and France has shown on many occasions that the fear
was not unjustified. Allen, Law and Orders, p. 12.
689. I do not suggest that such an encroaching power will be pursued
relentlessly or ruthlessly by our Parliament. But no Constitution can survive
without a conscious adherence to its fine checks and balances. Just as Court
ought not to enter into problems entwined in the "political thicket".
Parliament must also respect the preserve of the Courts. The principle of
separation of powers is a principle of restraint which "has in it the precept,
innate in the prudence of self-preservation (even if history has not
repeatedly brought it home), that discretion is the better part of valour"
Social Dimensions of Law and Justice-Julius Stone (1966). p. 668 Courts
have, by and large, come to check their valorous propensities. In the name
of the Constitution, the Parliament may not also turn its attention from the
important task of legislation to deciding court cases for which it lacks the
expertise and the apparatus. If it gathers facts, it gathers facts of policy. If it
records findings, it does so without a pleading and without framing any
issues. And worst of all, if it decides a Court case, it decides without hearing
the parties and in defiance of the fundamental principles of natural justice.
690. The Parliament, by Clause (4) of Article 329-A, has decided a matter of
which the country's Courts were lawfully seize d. Neither more nor less. It is
true, as contended by the learned Attorney-General and Shri Sen, that
retrospective validation is a well known legislative process which has
received the recognition of this Court in tax cases, pre-emption cases,
tenancy cases and a variety of other matters. In fact, such validation was
resorted to by the legislature and upheld by this Court in at least four
election cases, the last of them being Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand
Surana MANU/SC/0275/1969 : [1970]2SCR835 . But in all of these cases,
what the legislature did was to change the law retrospectively so as to
remove the reason of disqualification, leaving it to the Courts to apply the
amended law to the decision of the particular case. In the instant case the
Parliament has withdrawn the application of all laws whatsoever to the
disputed election and has taken upon itself to decide that the election is
valid. Clause (5) commands the Supreme Court to dispose of the appeal and
the cross-appeal in conformity with the provisions of Clause (4) of Article
329-A, that is. in conformity with the "judgment" delivered by the
Parliament. The
"separation of powers does not mean the equal balance of powers". says
Harold Laski, but the exercise by the legislature of what is purely and
indubitably a judicial function is impossible to sustain in the context even of
our co-operative federalism which contains no rigid distribution of powers
but which provides a system of salutary checks. and balances.<mpara>
691. I find it contrary to the basic tenets of our Constitution to hold that the
Amending Body is an amalgam of all powers-legislative, executive and
judicial. "Whatever pleases the emperor has the force of law" is not an
article of democratic faith. The basis of our Constitution is a well-planned
legal order, the presuppositions of which are accepted by the people as
determining the methods by which the functions of the government will be
discharged and the power of the State shall be used.
692. So much for the 39th Amendment. The argument regarding the
invalidity of the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 58 of 1974.
and of the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 has, however, no
substance.
The Constitutional amendments may, on the ratio of the Fundamental Rights
case, be tested on the anvil of basic structure. But apart from the principle
that a case is only an authority for what it decides, it does not logically
follow from the majority judgment in the Fundamental Rights case that
ordinary legislation must also answer the same test as a Constitutional
amendment.
Ordinary laws have to answer two f for their validity : (1) The law must be
within the legislative competence of the legislature as defined and specified
in Chapter I, Part XI of the Constitution and (2) it must not offend against
the provisions of Article 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution. 'Basic structure',
by the majority judgment, is not a part of the fundamental rights nor indeed
a provision of the Constitution. The theory of basic structure is woven out of
the conspectus of the Constitution and the amending power is subjected to
it because it is a constituent power. 'The power to amend the fundamental
instrument cannot carry with it the power to destroy its essential features'-
this, in brief, is the arch of the theory of basic structure. It is wholly out of
place in matters relating to the validity of ordinary laws made under the
Constitution.
693. Shri Shanti Bhushan thought it paradoxical that the higher power
should be subject to a limitation which will not operate upon a lower power.
There is no paradox, because certain limitations operate upon the higher
power for the reason that it is a higher power. A Constitutional amendment
has to be passed by a special majority and certain such amendments have
to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States as
provided by Article 368(2). An ordinary legislation can be passed by a
simple majority. The two powers, though species of the same genus,
operate in different fields and are therefore subject to different limitations.
694. No objection can accordingly be taken to the Constitutional validity of
the two impugned Acts on the ground that they damage or destroy the basic
structure. The power to pass these Acts could be exercised retrospectively
as much as prospectively.
695. These Acts effectively put an end to the two appeals before Us for they
answer the totality of the objections which were raised by Shri Raj Narain
against the election of Smt. Indira Gandhi. The basis of the findings on
which the High Court held against the successful candidate is removed by
Act 40 of 1975 retrospectively. Were the law as it is under the amendments
introduced by that Act, the High Court could not have held that the election
is vitiated by the two particular corrupt practices. In regard to the cross-
appeal filed by Sri Raj Narain, Shri Shanti Bhushan thought that a part of it
escapes through the crevices in the Act but I see no substance in that
contention either. I would like to add that the findings recorded by the High
Court in favour of Smt. Indira Gandhi are amply borne out by the evidence
to which our attention was drawn briefly by the learned Counsel for the
parties. The expenses incurred by the political party together with the
expenses incurred by her are not shown to exceed the prescribed ceiling.
Apart from that, Act 58 of 1974 makes that issue academic.
696. Finally, there is no merit in the contention that the Constitutional
amendment is bad because it was passed when some members of the
Parliament were in detention. The legality of the detention orders cannot be
canvassed in these appeals collaterally. And from a practical point of view,
the presence of 21 members of the Lok Sabha and 10 members of the Rajya
Sabha who were in detention could not have made a difference to the
passing of the Amendment.
697. In the result. I hold that Clauses (4) and (5) of Article 329-A are
unconstitutional and therefore void. But for reasons aforesaid I allow civil
Appeal No 887 of 1975 and dismiss civil Appeal No. 909 of 1975. There will
be no order as to costs throughout.
Civil Appeal No. 887 of 1975, Allowed; civil Appeal No. 909 of 1975,
Dismissed.
